org	name	tbl1	tbl2	tbl3	tbl4	tbl5	tbl6	value1	value2	value3	value4	value5	value6	desc1	desc2	desc3	desc4	type	text1	text2	perm1	perm2	perm3	perm4	perm5	perm6	perm7	perm8	perm9	perm10	perm11	perm12	perm13	perm14	perm15	perm16	perm17	perm18	perm19	perm20	oleptr	desc5	desc6	desc7	desc8	tbl7	tbl8	tbl9	tbl10	tbl11	tbl12	tbl13	tbl14	tbl15	tbl16	value7	value8	value9	value10	value11	value12	value13	value14	value15
0	No Decision Package																	N			GR_0002	GR_0003	GR_0004																									Y			INCLUDE													
AT	Office of the City Attorney																	C																																														
AT_01	Paralegal Realignment													Legal Services				N	This Requested Budget includes $100,000 in new interagency revenue from the Portland Police Bureau (PPB) for legal services provided to the civil forfeiture program. Prior to 2014, this work was handled by outside counsel on a contingency fee basis. Based on concerns about consistency and the City’s ability to provide effective oversight, the City Attorney’s Office decided to discontinue outside counsel services. In light of PPB’s request to reinstitute forfeiture work and its importance to crime prevention, safe neighborhoods and community justice, the City Attorney’s Office agreed to reallocate resources to develop and implement an in-house forfeiture program. The understanding was that over time the cost to the City Attorney’s Office of providing these legal services would be at least partially recouped through statutory attorney’s fees from the forfeiture program, while still resulting in a lower cost to PPB for these legal services. During the first full year of providing in-house legal services, the Office’s legal work enabled PPB to obtain approximately $650,000 in proceeds that PPB could use for specific crime prevention, drug awareness and educational programs. Outside counsel fees would have been in excess of $200,000. In contrast, under the current in-house funding mechanism, City Attorney fees were less than $100,000. PPB will use that savings in legal costs to fund valuable crime reduction programs. The Office will use this additional revenue to secure additional paralegal support for the Office in lieu of submitting a General Fund add package request.	This realignment will help the Office meet its urgent staffing needs without requiring additional support from the General Fund. The Office has been operating for some time with insufficient support staff, due to a number of factors. First, the Office has added four attorneys over the past 10 years, without adding additional support staff. Additionally, the Office has taken on more work in many areas that require significant paralegal support, including the Citywide Legal Records Management Project (public records), increased affirmative litigation to collect sums owed to the City, and the extremely document intensive Anderson ratepayer lawsuit. As a result, the Office has been unable to efficiently handle its paralegal work, which negatively affects timeliness, the ability to perform preventative legal work and trainings, and cost-effectiveness as some work is deferred and other work that could be performed by paralegals is undertaken by attorneys (which in turn means those attorneys are less available for preventative legal work and providing training). (See related Paralegal Reduction Package No. AT004.)																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
AT_02	Materials & Services Reduction													Legal Services				N	This decision package will reduce external materials and services expenses by $42,666 for office supplies, legal publications and education.	Reducing costs for legal publications is possible because online resources are available to replace some hard copy publications. Also, the Office reduced its required continuing legal education costs by providing more group and in-house education. However, this requires significant staff and attorney time to organize in-house training, which can overburden existing resources.  Another disadvantage is that not all specialized training is available in these formats.  Given these ongoing efforts, this reduction should be possible without a major effect on service delivery, at least in the near term.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
AT_03	Technology Support Staff Reduction													Legal Services				N	This reduction will eliminate services provided by BTS to the City Attorney’s Office for technology support. The City Attorney’s Office is assigned a full time Applications Analyst who assists the office with its technology needs including managing, updating and configuring software applications, training new employees on specialized software systems, maintaining the office’s website, troubleshooting daily problems with software and hardware, and providing other information technology support as needed.	Eliminating this positon will be a hardship on the existing administrative staff who will be responsible for absorbing most of this work. Response time for solving technology problems in the Office will be longer and could result in slower response times for legal services to the bureaus. It will also force the Office to defer plans to update its web presence, an update that would provide more information to City staff and the public on legal issues and resources. Additionally, without this support, the Office may be forced to hire outside consultants to assist with new software implementations, which is generally less cost-effective over time than using in-house staff.  This need will only increase with the rapidly changing technology landscape and the age of Office’s practice and document management systems.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
AT_04	New Paralegal Reduction													Legal Services				N	This reduction package would eliminate the new full-time paralegal position that will result from the realignment of civil forfeiture legal fees revenue. (See Decision Package AT001.) The office has added four General Fund Attorney positions since 2006 without increasing paralegal or legal assistant support. Specifically, the office’s greatest need for additional paralegal support is for litigation and legal records management.	"The Office has requested additional legal assistant and paralegal staffing over the past several years. In the last budget cycle, Council members noted that the City Attorney’s Office needs additional support staffing, and asked the Office to request those resources in this budget cycle. As those staffing needs accelerated due to the Anderson ratepayer case, members of the Council asked the Office to submit a paralegal request in the Fall BMP, and the Office did so. In reviewing that request, the City Budget Office noted “The need for additional support staff in the Office of the City Attorney is clear, and CBO recommends addressing this issue during FY 2016-17 budget development.”  The Office is now attempting to address this need with minimal impact on the General Fund through Decision Package AT001, which reallocates existing resources to fund a paralegal position.

The Office does not believe this reduction package, which would cut that paralegal position, would be cost effective for the City. Handling the vast bulk of the City’s legal work in-house is one way the Office has sought to achieve its strategic goals of excellent customer service, providing the highest quality legal services, and effective stewardship of public resources. In fact, outside counsel costs have decreased significantly over the past two years as the Office has handled more work internally with excellent results. The Office has achieved favorable outcomes for the City in 90% of contested cases over the past year. However, intensive litigation matters such as the Anderson ratepayer case (which to date has required the collection, review and organization of over 250,000 pages of documents) as well as increased affirmative litigation and collections matters (which bring in increased revenues to the City) are requiring more paralegal work than the Office can competently and effectively handle with existing resources. Taking this reduction will result in less efficient and less timely handling of litigation. It may well result in increased outside counsel costs far in excess of any “savings” that would be realized from this cut, particularly if the Office is forced to retain outside counsel to competently handle litigation that cannot be managed with existing resources. Additionally, current paralegals will continue to be overtaxed without this support and attorneys will be required to do administrative work that could otherwise be more cost-effectively handled by support staff, resulting in decreased preventative legal work and reduced timeliness in the provision of legal services.    

The Office also requires paralegal support for the Citywide Legal Records Management Project. The FY14-15 Requested Budget included one Deputy City Attorney position and one paralegal position to focus on critical citywide legal records issues, but the paralegal position was not approved. The paralegal position was nonetheless absolutely critical to the success of this project, which included helping coordinate multi-bureau public records requests, implementing and managing citywide public records software systems, working with records managers to help ensure legal compliance and providing training.  An existing paralegal was reassigned to this project full time from litigation work to ensure the success of the project. Without that support, the Office would have been unable to implement the new City software for public records requests that went live in December 2015 (GovQA). This new system enable the City to better manage and coordinate public records requests and reduce legal risk. It also serves important Council values of transparency, open government and public accountability by enabling the public to more easily submit, and the City to more effectively receive and respond to, public records requests. The Legal Records Management Project is an ongoing Citywide project requiring policy and practice development, training, and evaluation of how best to utilize and manage rapid technological changes for record creation, retention and management.  Paralegal support has been integral to this project’s success to date and is essential for ongoing and effective management of the City’s records in a way that reduces legal risk, improves public access and transparency, and increases internal efficiencies.

Finally, the Office has been asked to take on an increasingly large role in assisting bureaus and elected officials’ offices with responding to public records requests. One paralegal position is insufficient to take on all the programmatic aspects of the Legal Records Management Project and provide this assistance as well. The Office is unable to handle this additional work with existing resources.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
AT_05	Superfund Communications Consultant													Legal Services				N	The FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget included $75,000 in one-time General Fund resources for a Superfund Communications Consultant. This decision package authorizes continuation of that contract on a one-time basis for an additional $75,000.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_06	Vacant/Abandoned Homes																	N	This decision package requests $152,346 in one-time General Fund resources to fund a 1.0 FTE limited term Deputy City Attorney to support efforts addressing vacant and abandoned homes in Portland.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_07	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$17,191 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building.
$219,944 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$7,745 for the bureau’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation.


"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_08	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Superfund																	N	This request is to carryover $210,020 to the FY16-17 budget for expenses related to the Portland Harbor Natural Resource Trustees Participation Agreement. City Council authorized the City’s participation in funding the Portland Harbor Natural Resource Damage Assessment Plan to resolve liability before a Record of Decision is issued for the Portland Harbor Superfund Site. The Council authorized $400,000 by Ordinance No. 186810. To date $189,980 has been spent and the remaining funds will not be required until next fiscal year.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_09	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Ban-the-Box																	N	This request is to carryover $90,000 for Ban-the-Box Implementation. $100,000 was added to the City Attorney’s FY15-16 budget for Ban-the-Box implementation. The funds will be used for outreach and education to the public, to contract with agencies who provide services to returning citizens, and to contract with BOLI for enforcement. The office estimates $10,000 will spent this fiscal year and the remaining budget of $90,000 should be carried over to the next fiscal year to continue this work.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_10	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Honors Attorney																	N	"The request is to carryover $120,000 in vacancy savings to extend an Honors Attorney for one year. A well respected and highly experienced Senior Deputy City Attorney was seriously injured and unable to work for over a year. The office held this position open expecting his return but unfortunately, the office just learned he will not be returning. Several attorneys in the office have been handling his time sensitive work but there is a backlog of work accumulating, particularly in the areas of spectator facilities, condemnations, right-of-way legal work and some routine work of the attorneys that have been assisting. The office requests a carryover of a portion of this year’s vacancy savings to extend an Honors Attorney for one year to assist with the backlog. This is a cost effective method for obtaining the
needed assistance. The office rarely has vacancy savings and occasionally requests Compensation Set Aside funds. Even with this carryover, the office will still be contributing vacancy savings to the General Fund rather than requesting additional Compensation Set Aside funds this year."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AT_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AT_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU	Office of the City Auditor																	C																																														
AU_01	Hearings Office Funding													Hearings Office				N	"The Auditor’s Office requests a correction to the funding mechanism for the Hearings Office. This add package would fully fund the program through the General Fund Overhead Model, bringing it into alignment with City financial policy, creating efficiencies, and stabilizing the resources necessary to operate the Hearings Office. The total package is $301,430.
City financial policy (FIN 2.08.02) contains criteria for inclusion in the General Fund Overhead Model, all of which the Hearings Office meets:
•	If the service provides a benefit to all City bureaus,
•	If the service provides an oversight or regulatory function for City bureaus,
•	If the service exists within the General Fund,
•	If the bureau demand for a service is difficult to predict from one fiscal year to the next, or
•	If the costs of a service are difficult to charge to customer bureaus through a rate times unit model.
Currently, funding is provided through a mix of General Fund allocation, land use permit fees, and per-case charges to bureaus and outside agencies that contract with the Hearings Office. This variable funding creates uncertainty for the Hearings Office budget and causes the Auditor to draw from resources intended for other programs during years when revenues do not cover basic operations of the Hearings Office.
The Hearings Office requires a minimum staffing level to operate. One full-time Hearings Officer, one part-time Hearings Officer, and two Clerks are needed to cover basic operations, including holding hearings and maintaining office hours for the public to file appeals or review records. 
This package includes $75,104 to permanently eliminate interagency agreements between the Hearings Office and bureaus for appeals and code enforcement cases. Council approved one-time General Fund dollars to suspend these interagency agreements for FY 2015-16 as part of the Auditor’s initiative to improve access and eliminate financial barriers for community members seeking the Hearings Office’s services.  This request finalizes that change. 
Fee collection for land use cases, TriMet exclusion appeals and other contracted hearings will continue unless different arrangements are made. These revenues will be used to offset costs associated with services provided. Revenue remaining in the Hearings Office budget will be returned to the General Fund at the end of the fiscal year. 
The request contains an amount of $15,598 in external materials and services. This amount is the difference between existing General Fund support for the Hearings Office ($285,823) and the 3-year average of additional funding needed ($301,430). 
"	This package allows for a base level of funding for Hearings Office services, provides certainty and stability to the budget, reduces administrative burden, and brings the program into compliance with City financial policy.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
AU_02	Independent Police Review Investigators													Independent Police Review				N	"The Auditor’s Office requests $215,624 to fund two complaint investigators for the Independent Police Review. The request stems from the requirements in the City’s settlement agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice and the passage of House Bill 2002, a new State law related to profiling by law enforcement officers. Both the agreement and the new law place demands on IPR that cannot be met at the current staffing level. 

The settlement agreement calls for IPR to conduct meaningful independent investigations and work with the Police Bureau’s Internal Affairs unit to reduce redundant processes that exist in Portland’s officer accountability system. It also calls for all administrative investigations of officer misconduct to be completed within 180 days. The Department of Justice has made clear in a number of meetings with IPR and others at the City that it wants a reduction in the number of complaints dismissed at the intake stage and for IPR to conduct more of its own investigations. 

House Bill 2002, which bans profiling by law enforcement agencies, went into effect Jan. 1, 2016. It broadened the definition of what constitutes profiling to include age, race, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, political affiliation, religion, homelessness or disability.  The law requires that all complaints alleging that an officer has engaged in profiling be investigated. The provisions of House Bill 2002 go beyond existing Police Bureau directives prohibiting biased-based policing and will increase the number of cases subject to administrative investigation significantly. 

IPR has streamlined its intake process and is reducing areas of overlap with Internal Affairs. IPR also is in the process of reinvigorating a voluntary mediation option for some types of complaints, which could free up investigators for other cases. Gaining efficiencies helps, but they alone are not sufficient to meet the anticipated workload demand.

This request changes the one-time funding for one new investigator approved by Council in the Fall Budget Monitoring Process to ongoing funding and adds a second new investigator position.
"	Two additional complaint investigators will enable IPR to conduct 25-35 investigations per year, complete the complaint intake process in a timelier manner, and continue to monitor cases that are referred to Internal Affairs. The additional staffing will enable the division to reach its long term goal of 75% of investigations completed within 60 days. Without additional investigative resources, the City would be in danger of failing to comply with the settlement agreement and House Bill 2002. The Auditor's Ofice estimates it will complete 30% of cases within 60 days for FY 2016-17 without additional investigators. This target is estimated to increase to 45% if this package is funded.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
AU_03	Council Meeting Captioning													Council Clerk/Contracts Division				N	The Auditor’s Office requests an increase of $20,000 to cover the rising cost of captioning Council meetings and work sessions. In 2013, Council required that all public-facing video posted to the City’s website be captioned. Prior to the policy change, the Council Clerk only captioned regular City Council meetings. The new policy meant that work sessions must also be captioned. Additionally, the length of regular City Council meetings and the number of work sessions have grown substantially since passage of the ordinance, resulting in nearly double the estimated expenditures over historical spending on the captioning contract. Prior to these changes, the expense of captioning Council meetings was approximately $30,000 per year. We estimate that the current year will see between $55,000 and $60,000 in captioning costs. The Auditor has absorbed some of the additional cost but requests $20,000 to comply with Council’s directive to caption all public-facing video.	This package would ensure adequate funding to meet Council's requirement that all public-facing video posted to the City's website be captioned, inlucing continuation of streaming and captioning of Council work sessions.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
AU_04	Audit Services Division Cuts													Audit Services Division				N	"This cut package totals $161,032, or 9 percent of the Audit Services Division’s operating budget.  The package eliminates the only support position in the division, cancels the annual Community Survey, and reduces the budget available to pay for outside experts needed for specific audit subjects. If this package is taken, it would represent a significant shift in how Audit services manages its work, could affect the number of audits produced, and could impact decisions on the annual audit schedule.
The elimination of the Community Outreach and Information Representative position ($118,562) would require work to be redistributed within the division and elsewhere in the Auditor’s Office. This position is responsible for design and production of audit reports, media relations and public information tasks, website maintenance, communication with the public, and other general administrative tasks. These responsibilities would fall primarily to auditors in the division, impacting the time they have available to conduct audits. It could also mean closing the division to the public and directing the public to other divisions in the Auditor’s Office for assistance. 
The annual Community Survey has been conducted by Audit Services since 1990. Because of its long history, the City has access to rich historical and trend data. Council, bureaus and members of the public frequently use the survey data in research, decision-making and communications. It is being offered as a cut because it is informational only and is therefore not core to the mission of the Audit Services division. Eliminating the survey will save $24,500 and will not impact audits, but will take away a valuable decision-making and historical resource for bureaus and the public.
This package also contains a cut of $18,000 to Professional Services in the Audit Services division. This budget is used primarily to pay for outside consultants should the need arise for specialized or external expertise during the course of an audit.

"	"The elimination of this position will increase the administrative and publishing responsibilities for each auditor, which could result in changes to two of Audit Services performance measures: a decrease in the number of audits the division is able to complete within a year and the cost per audit hour. The current number of audits published per year is 12; the Auditor’s Office estimates these cuts could decrease that number to 10 reports per year, including discontinuation of the Community Survey. The current estimated cost per audit hour for FY 2016-17 is $125; it is unknown at this time how much these changes could increase hourly audit costs. 
Discontinuation of the Community Survey may have additional impact on other bureaus and offices that rely on the data from the survey for their own performance measures, planning, and decision making.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
AU_05	Independent Police Review Cuts													Independent Police Review				N	"This cut package totals $160,100, or approximately 10 percent of the Independent Police Review’s operating budget.  The package eliminates the Senior Management Analyst position in IPR ($140,100), whose primary responsibility is data analysis and reporting. This work includes production of IPR’s annual and quarterly reports, maintenance of the AIM database of complaints, and fulfilling data requests from the Citizen Review Committee and others.  This position also tracks internal complaint resolution and provides data critical to the improvements required under the Department of Justice agreement.
The annual budget for outside police accountability experts to review all officer-involved shootings and in-custody deaths is approximately $60,000. By managing the timing and workflow of cases given to the consultant, the Auditor’s Office should be able to absorb a reduction of $20,000 on an ongoing basis without impacting the contract or reports.
"	"Elimination of the Senior Management Analyst position would result in this work being spread to other employees in IPR, who are already working beyond their capacity, and other divisions in the Auditor’s Office.  Data quality and consistency may suffer as a result of this cut, and information about police complaints may be less readily or timely available. No specific impacts to performance measures are anticipated at this time.
Reduction of the annual budget amount for the outside expert’s review of officer-involved shootings and in-custody deaths will not impact performance.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
AU_06	Bureau-wide Cuts													Bureau-wide				N	The Auditor's Office proposes cuts to external materials and services across multiple divisions in the office. These reductions will significantly impact the office's ability to contract for outside expert services, cover expenses for supplies, conduct needed upgrades for software, and provide training opportunities for staff. The external materials and services budget allows the Auditor a degree of autonomy and independence that will be eroded if she is required to come before Council to request funding for each project or expenditure she needs to make.	No direct impact to performance measures is expected. Reductions of this size to external materials and services significantly impacts the Auditor's abiility to exercise independence in the conduct of the office's business.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
AU_07	Replenish LID Fund for Liens Software																	N	Transfer from the General Fund to replenish the LID Fund for expenses related to implementation of the Assessment and Liens system.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AU_08	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:

- $48,705 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AU_09	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Software & Security																	N	The Auditor's Office requests to carryover $90,000 to fund a variety of Auditor Hull Caballero's priorities and needs. $60,000 is requested to fund urgent software replacement projects for the Hearings Office and the Lobbyist Registration program, including $40,000 carried over last year that was not spent. These projects have been delayed by backlogs in Technology Services, lack of responsive proposals via the procurement process, and limitations on program and management staff time in the Auditor's Office. The office has made sufficient progress on these projects to anticipate successful starts to the replacement efforts next fiscal year.  Additional carryover of $30,000 is requested to fund projects and research that were not able to come to fruition this fiscal year, including security enhancements, communications support, and management consulting.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AU_10	Political Consultant Registration Software																	N	This package funds an interagency agreement with the Office of Management & Finance (Technology Services Fund) to implement political consultant registration and reporting software.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
AU_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
AU_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
BO	City Budget Office																	C																																														
BO_01	Eliminate LT Asst. Financial Analyst													Budget and Economics				N	The package eliminates a limited term Assistant Financial Analyst position and related materials and services. In addition, the bureau also replaced its existing subscription for economic data received from Moody's with an agreement for the same services from Portland State University. The new agreement will save the bureau $5,000 per year and will provide more localized economic data.	The limited term analyst position is assigned to analyze a portfolio of bureaus and  is responsible for various special projects. If eliminated, the portfolio and special project assignments will be transferred to other analysts. The increased workload on existing analysts will reduce the amount of time available for more in depth analysis and special projects as requested by Council. Given the increased workload, it is also expected that the bureau's customer service rating (a key performance measure) will be negatively affected - dropping from a goal of 4.35 to 4.25 on a 5-point scale.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
BO_02	Replace Budget Software System													Budget & Economics				N	The City implemented its current budget preparation software (BRASS) in 2003. Although the software continues to provide the basic tools for budget preparation and monitoring, it is currently operating on out-of-date and soon to be unsupported hardware. The City Budget Office believes it is in the City's best interest to replace BRASS with a software that is more actively supported by the vendor, including opportunities for future enhancements.	Replacing the existing software will ensure that the City remains on a supported environment in the future. The technology surrounding budget implementation software has seen great improvements over the last 11 years since the City purchased BRASS. Implementing these improvements could reduce time spent on data entry and processing, and enhance our capabilities in regards to performance budgeting.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
BO_03	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:

- $10,479 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
BO_04	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Process Improvement																	N	In FY 2015-16, CBO has been developing in-house expertise and engaging external contract support to perform process improvement events on City processes. In the fall of 2015, the Office engaged an outside consultant to perform a Kaizen event on the budget process, bringing together stakeholders representing the majority of bureaus and City Council office stakeholders. The event resulted in over two dozen process improvement ideas, many of which have been implemented or are in process. In December 2015, CBO staff facilitated a Government Accountability Transparency and Results (GATR) session on the affordable housing development process. This session resulted in process changes that were developed by PHB and BDS staff and approved by Council in March 2016 to streamline affordable housing development land use reviews. Building on these efforts, CBO planned to pilot an effort to create a pool of expertise and resources that could be engaged by bureaus Citywide to assist with process improvement and process reengineering work and training. This pilot is under development and will need to be continued into FY 2016-17. Models being explored are the Office of Performance, Strategy, and Budget in King County, WA and Denver, CO’s Peak Academy. The carry-over would fund external process improvement facilitation services, process improvement training for existing staff, and the possibility of a part-time, limited term position with Lean, Six-Sigma, or other process improvement/reengineering expertise. The goal of the pilot is to provide a proof of concept and, if initial efforts warrant, develop a Citywide, in-house, interagency-funded consulting and process-improvement training function. CBO believes that this aligns with the mission of a budget office to optimize value across an array of City functions, utilizing City resources most efficiently.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
BO_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
CITY	City of Portland																	C																																														
DR	Bureau of Fire & Police Disability & Retirement																	C																																														
DR_01	Reclassify Positions: Finance & Business Systems													Administration and Support				N	This package converts two 0.75 FTE senior financial analyst positions to a 1.0 FTE senior financial analyst position and a 1.0 FTE management analyst position. The net increase is 0.5 FTE and $24,144. The management analyst will be half-time dedicated to finance and half-time dedicated to business systems (information technology).	FPDR is dependent on one employee, a senior business systems analyst, to maintain and update the FPDR database used to make all benefit payments and to track member and survivor information. The lack of a backup staff person for this role is a serious threat to FPDR continuity of operations. Converting a part-time senior financial analyst position to a full time (but lower grade) management analyst position will add 0.5 FTE to address this risk, while maintaining finance functions at 1.5 FTE, with minimal additional cost. This package supports the City goal to prioritize human and environmental health and safety by providing retirement and disability benefits important to recruiting and retaining the most qualified police officers and fire fighters. The package also addresses three of five themes in the FPDR Strategic Plan (Technology Investment, Member Service Improvement, and Investment in Staff).																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
DR_02	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$24,516 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
DR_03	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_04	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DR_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS	Bureau of Development Services																	C																																														
DS_01	Mandatory 5% General Fund Cut													Neighborhood Inspections and Land Use				N	"All City bureaus were directed to develop budget reduction packages totaling 5% of the General Fund allocations in their operating budgets.  BDS receives General Fund support for its local code programs (Neighborhood Inspections and Land Use Services).

For BDS, this 5% cut equates to a reduction of $111,460.  The bureau is meeting this requirement by cutting an Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) with Portland State University (PSU) intended to fund a scholarship program at PSU for students of color and by making reductions to funds for nuisance abatements.
"	"For Land Use Services (LUS), the 5% reduction will result in a $55,771 reduction in the program’s miscellaneous services budget, cutting the partnership with PSU.  BDS has made many different efforts to attract a more diverse applicant pool for City Planner positions, but continues to get very little response because there are so few people of color in this profession.  Efforts to diversify the profession need to start earlier in the pipeline with encouragement to students of color to pursue urban planning as a profession.  BDS is partnering with PSU to create a scholarship program that would provide internship opportunities for PSU students at BDS in LUS. 

The loss of funding for the IGA would directly and negatively impact BDS’s efforts related to equity, inclusion, and diversity, as well as undermine workforce development efforts.  The PSU Masters in Urban & Regional Planning (MURP) Program is dominated by white students, and the urban planning profession is a predominantly white upper-middle class career path. Funding this scholarship/internship program is critical to making this field an attractive and feasible path for students of color, and a foundational step in diversifying the workforce at BDS, to better reflect the diversity in the community we serve.

For the Neighborhood Inspections Program, the 5% reduction will result in a $55,689 reduction in current nuisance abatement funds.  There will be 27 fewer nuisance abatements completed in FY 2016-2017, with serious health and sanitation concerns at those 27 properties not being addressed and removed.  Reducing this critical basic service for the community will impact services that are vital to communities of color, immigrant and refugee communities and/or people living with a disability.  Nuisance abatements are often completed in non-affluent neighborhoods where responsible parties are unable or unwilling to maintain their properties in compliance with the City’s minimum nuisance standards.  If left unabated, these health/sanitation violations will remain, impacting other properties and general neighborhood livability.  
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
DS_02	Extremely Distressed Properties Enforcement													Neighborhood Inspections				N	"In fall 2011, the City Council approved one-time General Fund support for one Senior Housing Inspector position to implement the Extremely Distressed Properties Enforcement Program (EDPEP).  One-time funding was continued in FY 2012-13 and FY 2013-14.  In FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16, the bureau funded the program through Neighborhood Inspections Program reserves. However, program reserves cannot sustain the program on an ongoing basis. EDPEP has proven to be an effective tool to respond to the substantial impact on some neighborhoods and properties from the prolonged recession and mortgage-related foreclosures.

EDPEP is directed towards un-maintained properties (often caused by abandonment due to foreclosures) with chronic nuisance and housing conditions that create risks of fire, public health hazards, and encourage criminal activity such as trespass, vandalism, graffiti, drug use and sale, prostitution, and additional serious public safety threats.  EDPEP enforces the City’s Property Maintenance Regulations and uses the abatement, vacation, and demolition of property as a key tool.  EDPEP provides a vital city service to relieve pressure on the Police Bureau and other City agencies.  EDPEP also proactively monitors properties to ensure that conditions are maintained and pursues additional abatements to resolve any recurring conditions.

EDPEP focuses on: abandoned/foreclosed properties that are illegally occupied; abandoned/foreclosed properties generating multiple complaints to BDS, the Office of Neighborhood (ONI) Crime Prevention, or Portland Police service calls regarding illegal activity; occupied properties without basic utilities (water, electricity, heat, etc); and abandoned/foreclosed properties with chronic, significant, and recurring nuisance and housing maintenance violations, which have resulted in unpaid enforcement lien balances.

Examples of resolved EDPEP enforcement cases include:
•	The demolition of vacant derelict homes adjacent to a public middle school that served as an attractive nuisance for students to engage in illegal drug use and other activity.
•	An abatement and vacation order for an illegally occupied home that had generated 109 police service calls within a twelve month period for drug use, assault, and criminal trespassing on neighbor properties.
•	The removal of illegally-occupied recreational vehicles that had harbored criminal activity on a property; this resulted in arrests for drug use and prostitution.

BDS is requesting the ongoing General Fund support for 2.0 Sr. Housing Inspector FTE to continue to implement this critical public safety and neighborhood livability program.  In addition, BDS is requesting $150,000 in ongoing funds for nuisance abatement work related to EDPEP demolitions.  BDS's Budget Advisory Committee (BAC), the BDS Labor Management Committee, and the Development Review Advisory Committee (DRAC) have all expressed support for this request.
"	There are currently 63 EDPEP enforcement cases being pursued, with 6 priority cases needing Code Hearings. An additional 47 properties have been referred to the program and are awaiting follow-up and 20 referred to the regular housing district due to the backlog.  EDPEP is expected to pursue corrective action on several chronic properties and expects to receive approval to vacate and demolish some of these properties in FY 2016-17.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS	ONGOING										
DS_03	Enhanced Inspections													Neighborhood Inspections				N	"Since FY 2012-13, BDS has received General Fund support for the Enhanced Rental Inspections Pilot Program in outer Southeast and Northeast Portland.  The program identifies properties that are chronically out of compliance with City housing maintenance codes and where cited repairs are not made in a timely manner, then focuses resources on conducting additional inspections of rental units with potential violations.  The program motivates landlords to provide and maintain safe and healthy rental housing while offering protection to vulnerable tenants who might fear retaliation by eviction for reporting substandard housing conditions.  This program helps create equitable housing options for community members and provide safe, healthy housing conditions for the City's low-income renters.

The Enhanced Rental Inspection pilot has been very successful; the Oregon Public Health Institute’s Health Impact Assessment of 2012 found that the program had greater potential than BDS’s standard inspection model “to contribute to improved health and health equity” of rental housing residents (http://www.healthimpactproject.org/resources/rental-housing-and-health-equity-in-portland-oregon-a-health-impact-assessment-of-the-citys-rental-housing-inspections-program). 

Due to the success of the program and its contributions to equity and community health and safety, in FY 2015-16 BDS expanded the program from outer Southeast and Northeast Portland into North, inner Northeast, and inner Southeast Portland. The expansion was funded by Neighborhood Inspections Program reserves as a one-time funding option. However, program reserves cannot sustain the program on an ongoing basis.  This Decision Package requests ongoing General Fund monies to support 3.0 Housing Inspector FTE, maintaining the expansion of the program into North, inner Northeast, and inner Southeast Portland.

BDS's Budget Advisory Committee (BAC), the BDS Labor Management Committee, and the Development Review Advisory Committee (DRAC) have all expressed support for this request.
"	The Enhanced Rental Inspections Program expansion from outer Southeast and Northeast Portland to include North, inner Northeast, and inner Southeast Portland will be maintained with further expansion citywide, offering greater protection to vulnerable tenants is critically needed during the current homelessness and housing state of emergency.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS	ONGOING										
DS_04	OMF IA Balancing													Development Services				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget: $180,885 for Strategic Techonolgy Pass Through and $12,276 for Fuel Station Debt Service.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
DS_05	ITAP Positions													Development Services				N	Add three full time positions to support the Information Technology Advancement Project funded by pemit fees.																													N			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
DS_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
DS_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC	Bureau of Emergency Communications																	C																																														
EC_01	5% General Fund Reduction Package													9-1-1 Operations				N	BOEC requests that this reduction not be accepted. The operating revenue to BOEC is paid by the City of Portand and all BOEC Partner jurisdictions in Multnomah County based on a relative percentage of population distribution.  A reduction in General Fund support ($674,837) results in an additional reduction in BOEC Partner revenue ($183,298) for a total operating budget reduction of $858,135.  The budget direction is to reduce ongoing expenses, which for BOEC is personnel.  This package eliminates 10 positions, one or two of the dispatch trainees positions hired in October 2015, which will cause them to be laid off prior to July 2016 should this decision package be accepted and eliminates  up to nine ongoing positions that are planned to be filled with new trainee candidates to begin employment a BOEC in March 2016; these positions would be laid off prior to July 2016.  In addition other trainee candidates hired into limited term positions in March 2016 will also be subject to layoff prior to July 2016 should decision packages requesting the establishment of permanent ongoing dispatch positions not be funded.	Acceptance of this decision package will significantly impact  BOEC operations and performance. Fourteen successful trainees/employees will be laid off and the next recruitment/trainee hiring process will be delayed from Fall 2016 to Spring 2017, when sufficient vacancies may exist in the reduced staffing level to allow recruitment.  The impact to BOEC operations is that no new dispatch employees will be certified in FY 1617 or FY 1718, during a period in which 15 dispatchers are expected to retire/depart/terminate which will reduce certified staffing levels from the current low level of 76 fully certified number to 65 or perhaps lower if more staff decide it is time to leave.  The BOEC goal is to have 120 ongoing dispatch positions with 110 fully certified and 10 positions for recuritment/training.  Currently there are 107 ongoing dispatch positions, this package will reduce that number to 97.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
EC_02	Add 4 FTE, EC Dispatch, Sr,													9-1-1 Operations				N	BOEC is requesting Council to approve the establishment of 13 additional dispatch positions.  This request has been presented in three decision packages, of 4, 4 and 5 FTE respectively.  This add package request is the first of three.  Funds are no longer available to pay for new employees from vacancy or other budget savings.  It is time to establish the needed and appropriate level of full time regular dispatch staff at BOEC.  It is desired by BOEC that all three add packages be approved; it is presented in three packages to provide Council more flexibility in the approval actions should overall City funding be unable to support the full request.	The impact of this decision package and the other two, to provide 13 additional positions will allow BOEC to continue twice per year recruitment of dispatch trainee candidates, with ongoing support for them as they move through the training process to certification.  Without approval of these requests the recruitment process will be reduced from twice per year to perhaps once per year.  The number of certified dispatch staff will certainly decline.  Overtime is used to provide additional dispatch time and support BOEC performance but there is a limit to how much overtime current staff can and should work.  Call performance will decline as staff levels decline and the results will certainly be unpleasant.  Staff morale declines with the reduction in operations staff and departure of certified staff increases which amplifies the overall staffing and performance challenge.  Staff who may have preferred to stay for a few more years under better conditions are retiring early or simply leaving BOEC employment.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS	ONGOING										
EC_03	Add 4 FTE, EC Dispatch, Sr													9-1-1 Operations				N	BOEC is requesting Council to approve the establishment of 13 additional dispatch positions.  This request has been presented in three decision packages, of 4, 4 and 5 FTE respectively.  This add package request is the second of three.  Funds are no longer available to pay for new employees from vacancy or other budget savings.  It is time to establish the needed and appropriate level of full time regular dispatch staff at BOEC.  It is desired by BOEC that all three add packages be approved; it is presented in three packages to provide Council more flexibility in the approval actions should overall City funding be unable to support the full request.	The impact of this decision package and the other two, to provide 13 additional positions will allow BOEC to continue twice per year recruitment of dispatch trainee candidates, with ongoing support for them as they move through the training process to certification.  Without approval of these requests the recruitment process will be reduced from twice per year to perhaps once per year.  The number of certified dispatch staff will certainly decline.  Overtime is used to provide additional dispatch time and support BOEC performance but there is a limit to how much overtime current staff can and should work.  Call performance will decline as staff levels decline and the results will certainly be unpleasant.  Staff morale declines with the reduction in operations staff and departure of certified staff increases which amplifies the overall staffing and performance challenge.  Staff who may have preferred to stay for a few more years under better conditions are retiring early or simply leaving BOEC employment.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS	ONGOING										
EC_04	Add 5 FTE EC Dispatch Sr.													9-1-1 Operations				N	BOEC is requesting Council to approve the establishment of 13 additional dispatch positions.  This request has been presented in three decision packages, of 4, 4 and 5 FTE respectively.  This add package request is the third of three.  Funds are no longer available to pay for new employees from vacancy or other budget savings.  It is time to establish the needed and appropriate level of full time regular dispatch staff at BOEC.  It is desired by BOEC that all three add packages be approved; it is presented in three packages to provide Council more flexibility in the approval actions should overall City funding be unable to support the full request.	The impact of this decision package and the other two, to provide 13 additional positions will allow BOEC to continue twice per year recruitment of dispatch trainee candidates, with ongoing support for them as they move through the training process to certification.  Without approval of these requests the recruitment process will be reduced from twice per year to perhaps once per year.  The number of certified dispatch staff will certainly decline.  Overtime is used to provide additional dispatch time and support BOEC performance but there is a limit to how much overtime current staff can and should work.  Call performance will decline as staff levels decline and the results will certainly be unpleasant.  Staff morale declines with the reduction in operations staff and departure of certified staff increases which amplifies the overall staffing and performance challenge.  Staff who may have preferred to stay for a few more years under better conditions are retiring early or simply leaving BOEC employment.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS	ONGOING										
EC_05	OMF IA Balancing													Emergency Communications				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. 
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EC_06	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EC_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EC_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM	Portland Office of Emergency Management																	C																																														
EM_01	Training and Development Officer													Emergency Operations				N	"Under the supervision of the Operations Manager, the Training and Development Officer (TDO) will be responsible for maintaining PBEM’s and the city’s readiness to respond to emergencies and disasters. This cross functional position will work with all sections in PBEM as well as all other city bureaus and Multnomah County to develop and maintain a robust Emergency Coordination Center (ECC) program. 

The primary responsibilities of this position would include:

•  Working in close coordination with the Training and Exercise Section to develop, maintain and monitor training standards for ECC responders and PBEM Duty Officers. 
•  Developing, organizing and maintaining ECC and PBEM Duty Officer Standard Operating Procedures, job aides and related policies.
•  Developing, tracking and evaluating Operations Section and ECC metrics, performance measures and monthly progress towards established targets. 
•  Setting policy for the City’s crisis information sharing platform, WebEOC, and developing written WebEOC procedures, customizing incident management and information sharing “boards”, and providing ongoing and refresher training on the use of the system.
•  Serving as the 24/7 Duty Officer on a rotating basis and as ECC Manager during emergency incidents and planned events.
"	"•  Improved city emergency management training and exercise program.
•  Improved functional and operational capabilities of WebEOC.

"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
EM_02	Assistant Program Specialist													Emergency Operations				N	"The Volunteer Programs Developer (Assistant Program Specialist) is responsible for a range of duties that support PBEM’s volunteer programming and outreach activities. This includes the following:

•  Organizing, managing, and providing training to all designated BEECN volunteers (minimum 474 volunteers) to instruct them on safe and effective practices and procedures to deploy the BEECN following an earthquake. 
•  Providing BEECN exercise and drill opportunities to keep volunteers confident and competent in the skills needed to deploy in the event of a disaster. 
•  Ensuring that caches and cache supplies and equipment are replenished and replaced as needed and as resources permit; and, ensuring that caches receive routine testing and maintenance as required. 
•  Completing all documentation and instructions for BEECN operations. 
•  Maintaining Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with property owners that host BEECN caches.
•  Additionally supports the NET Program by:
o  Instructing First Aid courses at low cost for Portland NETs and other community members.
o  Planning and executing special events (such as exercises and recognition events).
o  Coordinating amateur radio classes for both NET and BEECN volunteers.
o  Developing a volunteer responder training based on NET, but suitable for the business community (called “NETwork”).
o  Working in partnership with local school districts to produce a Teen CERT program that will be sited in schools.
"	"• Increased community resilience and neighborhood response capabilities. 
• Significantly improved awareness in communities of the City’s plans to assist Portlanders immediately following a major seismic event.
• BEECN volunteer teams of a minimum of 8 volunteers each will be established for the 48 BEECN sites and 30 fire stations (a minimum of 474 volunteers total).
• 60 additional volunteers licensed and trained to use the amateur radio sets at each of Portland’s 30 fire stations, allowing the City and neighborhoods to communicate after commonly relied upon communication systems (e.g. cell phones) are no longer functional.
• Greater community involvement in emergency preparedness as schools, businesses, and faith institutions are invited to help manage their local BEECN.
• Find secure locations for all 48 BEECN equipment caches in the community (at this time, because of security concerns, only 29 of 48 are placed).
• Test the citywide BEECN system no less than once a year in order to find equipment/logistical gaps in the system and to build best practices for the program.
• Teen CERT programming in at least two Portland local school districts.
• Minimum 35% of all NET volunteers receive First Aid training and certification.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
EM_03	Residential Seismic Strengthening													Planning and Preparedness				N	"In partnership with Enhabit (formerly Clean Energy Work), PBEM successfully implemented a pilot project in 2014 to demonstrate the cost-effectiveness and feasibility of a residential seismic strengthening project using a federal Hazard Mitigation Grant. The $100,000 pilot helped to subsidize the costs of retrofitting 23 single-family residential homes throughout Portland at an average cost of $5,400, and a benefit-cost ratio of over 3 to 1. In August 2015 PBEM submitted a Pre-Disaster Mitigation (PDM) Grant for approximately $526,000 to subsidize the costs of retrofiting an additional 150-200 single-family homes. To ensure an equitable distribution of these funds and representation of low income residents, at least 50% of eligible properties randomly selected were below the median home price. This innovative project was identified for further review by FEMA and we anticipate receiving a FY 2015 PDM award by February 2016. This decision package will leverage the FY 2015 grant and enable us to retrofit twice as many homes than we would otherwise.
"	"•  Retrofits such as these can improve a home’s performance during an earthquake, leading to less time and money required for repairs or demolition, and potentially saving lives. They can also prevent further secondary damage to homes, such as water damage from broken pipes or fire from damaged gas lines. By improving the performance of a home during a seismic event, this project could potentially prevent the displacement of hundreds of people after an earthquake. This will minimize the demand on scarce resources needed for emergency sheltering, and speed recovery by keeping people in their homes and expediting the return to normal economic activity.
•  It is very likely that, even if Portland does not experience an earthquake for many years, the value of seismically strengthened homes may increase. As earthquake awareness gradually builds in Portland and nationally, homebuyers may become more likely to pay higher prices for retrofitted homes. Homeowners who participate in the residential seismic strengthening program may eventually be able to recover a portion of their costs incurred from the retrofits in the form of increased home equity or profit from selling their homes.
•  The most substantial benefit of seismic strengthening will come in the form of reduced damage if a large earthquake does occur in the region. For many people, the home they live in is also their largest financial investment. Unfortunately, due to costs or ineligibility, many families do not carry earthquake insurance; if they do, their policies typically have very high deductibles. Seismic strengthening of single-family homes in Portland may help homeowners qualify for earthquake insurance, and it will protect homes from the severe damage they are otherwise likely to incur from a major earthquake. By reducing overall damage and total repair cost, and improving eligibility for earthquake insurance, the seismic strengthening project will reduce the financial burden of homeowners after a major earthquake. It will also reduce the number of homes requiring demolition after an earthquake, reducing the amount of debris generated, and easing demand on City resources for clean-up, as well as substantially lessening homeowners’ reliance on federal disaster assistance and temporary housing.
•  Protecting this investment will also help to foster economic resilience. It will reduce the number of Portland residents that are displaced either temporarily or permanently in a major earthquake. This will ease the burden on City and County resources for temporary sheltering, and maintain a higher morale by enabling residents to remain at home while essential services and utilities are restored. People remaining in their homes and neighborhoods will expedite the return to normal economic activity and enable many businesses to stay in operation.
•  The residential seismic strengthening project is a cost-effective way to bring older homes closer to the level of safety offered by newer homes built to modern standards while retaining the character of older, established neighborhoods. Safety enhancements to older homes may help alleviate some of the pressure to demolish old homes to make way for newer buildings. The retrofits proposed in this grant application may also reduce the number of older homes in Portland that are completely destroyed and have to be demolished and rebuilt after a large earthquake. Portland residents pride themselves on the character of their neighborhoods, and many will see this opportunity to preserve homes considered part of Portland’s heritage as a city-wide benefit, which residents and visitors can enjoy for years to come.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
EM_04	Five Percent Required Reduction													Emergency Management				N	PBEM proposes to take the required five percent reduction ($115,471) from External Materials & Services. In addition to providing discretionary spending to implement the bureau’s programs (office supplies, printing, travel, training) it also supports operating costs for the Neighborhood Emergency Team program (vests and helmets, fire extinguisher refills, other miscellaneous expenses) as well as the Basic Earthquake Emergency Communication Node program (radio and equipment replacement). External Materials & Services also contributes towards: translation services and printing costs to translate PBEM documents into Safe Harbor languages, entering into contracts for professional or technical services and sponoring community events and organizations. PBEM will seek federal grant and other funds to pay for some of these items; however, the lack of a stable fund to implement the bureau’s programs hinders our ability to adequately equip trained NET volunteers, ensure the readiness of the BEECN program and fulfill the bureau’s core mission.	"•  Inability to print and translate PBEM preparedness, educational and training material in Safe Harbor Languages. 
•  Inability to achieve key performance measures related to the NET program.
•  Inability to ensure interoperable radio communications between the BEECN sites and local fire stations. 
•  Inability to meet public education, outreach and engagement objectives in the bureau's strategic plan.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
EM_05	ECC O&M Cost True Up	Y												Emergency Management				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_06	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$10,903 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_07	FY 2015-16 Carryover: COOP Planner																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_08	FY 2015-16 Carryover: BEECN Program Specialist																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_09	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Survey & Public Messaging																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_10	FY 2015-16 Carryover: NHM Planner																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_11	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_12	Satellite Phones and Grant Backfill																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
EM_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
EM_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES	Bureau of Environmental Services																	C																														N			EXCLUDE													
ES_01	Condition Assessment													Pumping and Treatment O&M; Stormwater System				N	"CONDITION ASSESSMENT


Private Property Retrofit Program:  Stephens Creek Stormwater System Plan $100,000

BES pursues opportunities to manage stormwater on private property in order to meet expected levels of service, address gaps in the City’s stormwater system, and avoid future risk claims and potential law suits. In 2013, the Bureau completed the Stephens Creek Stormwater System Plan, which piloted a planning process for addressing stormwater needs throughout the city and recommended projects to improve both stormwater infrastructure and watershed health conditions in the Stephens Creek subwatershed. This funding will allow us to implement some of the recommended pilot projects identified in the Stephens Creek Stormwater System Plan to address system needs and also inform stormwater system planning efforts for other parts of the city. 

Addressing stormwater needs on private property may result in avoided costs of comparably more expensive expansions to the City-owned stormwater system. Using natural systems/ green infrastructure is often less expensive than built/ grey infrastructure, and provides benefit beyond managing volume, flow, and pollutants. Investing in private property retrofits generally results in private property owners being responsible for the long-term operating and maintenance costs of stormwater management infrastructure on their property.

This request addresses a number of strategies identified in the BES 2011-2016 Strategic Plan related to watershed quality, system resiliency, condition assessment and completion of the Stormwater System Plan.

Plans tied to this request include:   Portland Watershed Management Plan, Climate Change Preparation Strategy, Comp Plan/Citywide Systems Plan

KPMs tied to this request include:   
o	Watershed Health Index (WSHI) for Water Quality


Stormwater Planning Data Manager/Coordinator (Environmental Specialist) (1.00 FTE) $106,512

The development of a Stormwater System Plan is a priority for the Bureau and will provide long-term direction regarding future investments in stormwater collection and management.  The Bureau has existing system plans for our combined and sanitary systems which direct and prioritize our work, and will benefit from similar planning and direction for the stormwater system.  This position will bring necessary capacity to the Stormwater System Program to coordinate across work groups and develop business practices for managing stormwater asset data. Inadequate management of this information, or failure to complete the work, will further delay stormwater system planning and could result in poorly defined stormwater policy and capital objectives.  

Since April 2015, the Bureau has utilized staff from Development Services to begin this work, but this is not a sustainable arrangement.

The position needs to have the skills and abilities to perform business process analyses and reach sound, logical conclusions regarding customer needs and business service requirements.  The position will work collaboratively with team members, BTS and other information systems staff and customer groups to ensure project accountability.  The position must also be able to diagnose and resolve complex systems analysis problems; evaluate alternatives and make sound independent decisions within established guidelines. The position must communicate clearly and effectively to diverse audiences of technical and non-technical stakeholders.

Plans tied to this request include: Portland Watershed Management Plan, Climate Change Preparation Strategy, Comp Plan/Citywide Systems Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	WSHI for Water Quality 


Portable Flow Meter $20,000

Purchase of a portable flow meter is needed to monitor and analyze water use and perform condition assessment.  The expected useful life of the meter is 15-20 years.  The plant water demand at Columbia Boulevard Wastewater Treatment Plant (CBWTP) is 6 million gallons (MG) per day.  Water is obtained through deep well pumps (plant water), the water reuse facility, and lastly City water.  The information provided via the meter will allow a water audit to be completed to determine the gap between how much plant water is available and what is needed so informed decisions can be made regarding water system capacity improvements such as water reuse upgrades and the dewatering projects.  Ultimately, these projects will lead to more efficient operations and support for improved environmental sustainability goals.  Knowing what size of water system and associated equipment is needed to optimally meet plant water demands is critical to making good investment decisions for the bureau and efficiently managing operating costs related to City water use at the treatment plant. It will also identify areas for water efficiency improvements where there is a high water demand due to inefficient equipment, operating protocols and/or system leaks.  A tool such as this provides a long-term means to gather information in very specific process areas and assets unlike the two (2) main water meters that exist now and only have the ability to monitor lump sum water usage at the CBWTP.  The meter also has the capability to determine pipe thickness and struvite or grease build-up which will be used for pipe condition assessment.  Additionally, the meter will be used at pump stations to identify deterioration of pump capacity by applying the portable meter to discharge pipes.  It will also provide information necessary to make decisions on what kind of seals to put in pumps, which will minimize water use and enhance the operation and maintenance of pumps. The very low investment cost of this meter means a positive return on investment is very achievable.  

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance Plan, Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) System Operating Plan, City’s Sustainability Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Wastewater Services KPM - % preventative plant maintenance work orders


Digester Gas Piping $135,000

The gas piping system transports digester gas produced in the treatment plant process from the digesters for beneficial use in three ways: 1) as fuel for the Cogen engines to produce electricity and heat for use onsite (this saves the WG approximately $900,000/year in gross energy production), 2) for sale to Malarkey Roofing (this provides revenue to the bureau of approximately $275,000/year) and 3) in the boilers for digester and space heating (this offsets the need to purchase gas from NW Natural).  Gas that is not beneficially used is transported to the waste gas flares for safe discharge into the atmosphere.  Several of the pressure reducing valves (PRVs) are releasing digester gas out of the system at times outside of the intended design parameters of the PRVs leading staff to suspect that there may be a blockage/obstacle or other type of condition deficiency in the system.  Releasing excess digester gas through the PRVs releases flammable methane gas into the atmosphere at levels above design parameters.  In addition, the gas piping has not been inspected for approximately 20 years and it is over 40 years old.  If the gas piping fails, digester gas cannot be transported for beneficial use and would be unsafely discharged into the atmosphere resulting in odors, loss of revenue, health and safety hazards and a potential violation to our DEQ Air Quality Permit.  

This condition assessment funding will allow us to evaluate the piping system to determine if any system repairs are required, while also providing information to assist in determining the remaining useful life of the piping and associated equipment.  This funding request includes four (4) 10-inch valve replacements @ $15,000 each ($60,000); vendor inspection of lines @ $35,000; replacement of flex lines from each digester @ $10,000 each ($40,000). Once the assessment is complete the information can be used to better evaluate risk and develop a recommendation about potential operating and/or capital funding for asset rehabilitation. 

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation & Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan



KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Bureau KPM – Beneficially reuse treatment process by-products, % reuse of methane, % reuse of biosolids
o	Wastewater Services KPM – Methane usage at CBWTP (% beneficially used); Revenue from sale of methane to Malarkey Roofing


Columbia Boulevard Wastewater Treatment Plant (CBWTP) and Tryon Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant (TCWTP) Outfalls $50,000

The CBWTP and TCWTP effluent outfall pipes are critical assets located under water in the Columbia and Willamette Rivers that require regular inspections to ensure they are functioning properly.  The outfalls and their diffuser systems are permitted under the bureau’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit through Oregon DEQ.  If the outfalls are compromised due to operational issues or structural failures the outfalls would reduce the amount or rate of flow that could be treated through the treatment plant and possibly result in a violation of the NPDES Permit.  The condition assessment consists of scanning sonar, diver inspections and a closed-circuit camera (CCTV) inspection of the interior of the outfalls on a planned schedule.  The sonar inspection provides information on the operational performance related to the amount of accumulated sediment within the outfalls.  

Visual diver inspection of the outfall diffusers provides information on their condition and operational performance, which is key to the treatment plants’ ability to meet the receiving water quality requirements outlined in the NPDES Permits.  The interior CCTV inspection provides information on the structural integrity of the pipe with respect to ovality and wall thickness deterioration and defects. A sonar survey and diver inspection of the diffusers is recommended by engineering personnel to be conducted 50’ upstream and 50’ downstream of each outfall every 3 years.  An extensive interior/exterior assessment is recommended every 5 years to assess the condition while also providing data for the TCWTP and CBWTP mixing zone studies, which are on a 5-year cycle.  The next 3-year survey and diffuser inspection is needed for CBWTP OF (Outfall) 1 and TCWTP OF in FY 2016-17 and is estimated to cost approximately $50,000.  As part of this work, the CBWTP OF1 diffuser will be repaired as detailed in the last inspection in 2012.  The next complete interior/exterior inspection and assessment for CBWTP OF1 and TCWTP OF is needed in FY 2018-19 and is estimated to cost $100,000.   Based on the 2012 inspection, CBWTP OF3 has several buried diffusers which could restrict flow through the outfall pipe and/or affect the mixing zone so it will be assessed and modified as part of a standalone CIP project.  

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation & Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	City KPM – Number of combined sewer overflow events
o	Bureau KPM – Meet requirements of NPDES wastewater permits (CBWTP & TCWTP) and Memorandums of Agreements (MOAs); Reinvest in the system per current facility and system plans
o	Wastewater Services KPM – NPDES compliance for CBWTP; NPDES compliance for TCWTP


Condition Assessment (Maintenance Planner/Sr. Engineering Associate) (2.00 FTE) $207,564

Condition assessment is an essential component of a comprehensive and robust utility asset management program.  These two positions will develop, implement and sustain an ongoing formal condition assessment program for the treatment plants and pump stations. A very basic level of assessing the condition and/or performance of plant/pump assets is currently conducted during daily inspections, preventative and predictive maintenance work and corrective repairs. However, this only includes the ability of technicians to note cursory observations by looking, listening and feeling equipment.  

By better understanding the condition of facilities, systems and assets, BES can make strategic reinvestment decisions to address facility or asset deficiencies.  Connecting asset condition and risk-based decision-making to reliably meet an established level of service provides the best opportunity to subsequently a) optimize reliability, b) extend useful life, c) lower life costs that meet level of service, and d) develop an effective maintenance strategy.  The work anticipated includes the development of a formal condition assessment program to provide a detailed assessment of the condition of assets and transition these assessments into capital project requests and/or maintenance strategies to improve work effectiveness and optimize asset life.  Best results will come from the involvement of both maintenance and engineering expertise, therefore positions from both professions are being requested.

Current staff workloads are already maximized to complete critical core work required to meet established levels of service, therefore reassigning existing positions to this condition assessment effort will result in reduced performance of other critical tasks.  

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Bureau KPM – Reinvest in the system per current facility and system plan.

"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
ES_02	Strategic Planning Initiative													Asset Management; Portland Harbor; Stormwater System				N	"STRATEGIC PLANNING INITIATIVES


Portland Harbor Communications; offset by Reduced Payment to Lower Willamette Group (LWG) $0

The Bureau is currently assuming that the Portland Harbor Record of Decision (ROD) will be issued in FY 2016-17 at the earliest.  As the process proceeds, it is anticipated that the City’s payment to the Lower Willamette Group may be reduced by $100,000.  However, there will need to be an increased need for communication services including public engagement, media, and internal coordination with City Council offices and other bureaus.  The Bureau proposes re-allocating this LWG payment to meet the future Portland Harbor communication needs. 

Plans:  Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, and others.

KPMs:  n/a


Portland Harbor Project Manager (Sr. Program Manager) (1.00 Limited Term conversion to 1.00 FTE) $116,100

The Portland Harbor work is transitioning from the investigation and analysis phase to an allocation and litigation support phase and eventually the design and implementation of cleanup actions. The Bureau is proposing to convert a limited term Senior Program Manager to an FTE as this program expects to see a significant increase in the need for project management, strategic support, and communication and outreach support over the next year as EPA issues its cleanup decision and beyond as the work moves towards implementation. The cost of this position is funded by reduction in contract resources.

Plans:  Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, and others.

KPMs:  n/a


Capital Planning and Asset Management (Civil Engineer) (1.00 FTE) $134,988 ($67,494 within the CIP Program)

With the completion of the CSO Control System and associated improvements at the Columbia Boulevard Wastewater Treatment Plant, there is far greater complexity to planning work. The Bureau is currently working on an update of the CBWTP Facilities Plan, the Stormwater System Plan, and a plan to address un-sewered areas in both the combined system and the separated sanitary system. Completion of each of these plans in accordance with regulatory requirements is constrained by current staffing levels. A Pump Station Improvement Program (Plan) has been delayed for multiple years for the same reason. The BES Resiliency Planning effort addressing climate change preparation and earthquake resiliency is also utilizing the currently available engineering planning resources.

This position will produce plans that assist the bureau in evaluating budget needs to meet regulatory requirements, and in weighing policy and infrastructure investment options with risks and benefits. The Bureau is required by permit and by code to regularly develop plans for all aspects of the public infrastructure including two treatment plants, one hundred pump stations, and over 2,500 miles of collection system pipes. The Asset Systems Management division is responsible for analyzing system data, planning infrastructure management and recommending projects that will cost-effectively reduce risk and meet expected customer levels of service and support regulatory compliance. Current staffing levels have not been sufficient to keep up with long-range planning needs. There are currently 21 staff and 3 contractors in the Asset Systems Management division. Of these, only two perform the roles of project manager and are proficient at leading large scale planning projects. 

Failure to complete these planning efforts in a timely manner risks failure to meet permit requirements and negatively impacts the long-term reliability of the system. 

Plans tied to this request include: Public Facilities Plan, Comprehensive Plan, Climate Action Plan and Climate Change Preparation Strategy 

KPMs tied to this request include:
1.1 Convey Sewage to prevent releases
1.2 Eliminate flooding that impacts public safety
2.1 Increase stormwater retention
3.2 Manage stormwater for watershed health
3.3 Prevent sewage releases
5.1 Reinvest in system
8.1 Meet requirements of NPDES permits
8.2 Prevent combined sewer overflows (CSOs)
10.1 Equitably distribute projects 


Professional Services Contract Support for Stormwater System Plan $100,000

When Watershed Services reorganized to incorporate the Stormwater System Plan (SWSP) staff and program, the budget was not increased to accommodate pending SWSP work.  During the past year, the Bureau has used a patchwork of budget resources to ensure continued SWSP progress.  The SWSP has upcoming programming needs that cannot be met by the skillset of existing staff.  These services will not be needed over the long-term, therefore contracting for this work is a more efficient way to address the current need.

Because the SWSP is a critical component of long-term strategic planning, failure to increase these funds will require continued allocation of other resources, leading to weakened condition assessment outcomes and continued risk to levels of services in other programs. 

This request addresses the a number of strategies identified in the BES 2011-2016 Strategic Plan related to watershed quality, system resiliency, condition assessment and completion of the Stormwater System Plan.

Plans tied to this request include:   Portland Watershed Management Plan, Climate Change Preparation Strategy, Comp Plan/ Citywide Systems Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: WSHI for Water Quality


Principal Business Systems Analyst (1.00 FTE) $125,034

Due to prior staff reductions, increasing general information technology expectations, and growth in Bureau data collection initiatives, the Bureau currently has a mismatch between data resources and the human capital to effectively manage those resources.  As such, data is not used to optimal efficiency.  The Principal Business Service Analyst position will be responsible for organizing and implementing a Bureau-wide data management strategy, and will offload responsibility from the Mapping, Data and Application Services (MDAS) Division Manager allowing sharper focus on other mission-critical tasks. It is anticipated that this is a first, critical component of a longer-term Bureau effort to better utilize data to aid planning efforts, operational efficiency and decision-making.  Data management has been identified by Bureau leadership as a key component in support of long-term strategic initiatives to improve analysis and enhance the efficiency of decision-making and operations.  Failure to implement this position will restrict the Bureau’s ability to identify data-based efficiencies, limit opportunities to innovate within the Bureau, and hamper long-term strategic initiatives.

Plans:  Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs:  Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.

"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
ES_03	Regulatory and Permit Compliance													Environmental Compliance; Watershed Management				N	"REGULATORY/PERMIT COMPLIANCE


Water Resources Program Manager (1.00 FTE) $119,742

The City is subject to significant requirements governing the collection and treatment of wastewater, as outlined in the permits that govern the operations of both the Columbia Boulevard and the Tryon Creek Wastewater Treatment Plants.  The Environmental Protection Agency and State regulatory agencies are creating National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits with greater and more stringent requirements and more significant system/water quality assessments throughout the permit cycle.  Concurrently, due to decreased analytical capacity by these entities, local jurisdictions, of necessity, are taking on greater responsibilities in the evaluation of environmental data.  The Bureau has pending applications for new permits for both the Tryon Creek and the Columbia Boulevard permits.

The proposed position, housed in the Environmental Compliance Program of Pollution Prevention Services, will perform permit management for both wastewater treatment plants.  The increased level and complexity of permit compliance management and coordination with staff throughout the Bureau and rapidly changing regulatory environment require strong scientific/technical skills, regulatory knowledge and resources and ability to oversee permit administration. An expected outcome of this position is effective permit management that is both responsive to regulatory requirements but also representative of sound evaluation, monitoring and planning for compliance that  protects the wastewater treatment and collection systems and the environment and also promotes reliable, cost effective operations.

Failure to adequately monitor, report, negotiate and plan for permit compliance places water quality at risk and threatens implementation of the most effective investments for the City.

Plans:  Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs:  Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Columbia Slough Watershed – Mandatory 10-yr Contaminant Sampling Reporting $40,000

In 2005, DEQ issued a Record of Decision (ROD) that establishes actions that the City and other potentially responsible parties must implement to address sediment that poses unacceptable risk to human health and wildlife in the Columbia Slough. The 2005 ROD requires the City to:
o	Control sources of pollution conveyed from private properties to the Slough through City stormwater pipes
o	Treat stormwater runoff from targeted City roadways that have high traffic volume or that serve industrial/commercial land use
o	Implement programmatic, watershed-wide actions to reduce risk to humans and wildlife
o	Perform long-term monitoring (fish tissue and sediment)
o	Perform targeted in-water sediment cleanup (if needed)

The City must implement these actions to meet state and federal requirements for cleanup of contaminated sediments in the Columbia Slough. This request addresses a regulatory requirement in the work plan for the program and will support City compliance with required actions to clean up contaminated sediments in the Columbia Slough as identified by the ROD.
Plans tied to this request include: Portland Watershed Management Plan, Columbia Slough Sediment Program Work Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	WSHI for Water Quality
o	Pollution Prevention Services KPM - Average resources spent in site investigations and cleanup, per site investigates or remediated


Private Property Retrofit Program: Slough Sediment $100,000

In 2005, DEQ issued a Record of Decision (ROD) that establishes actions that the City and other potentially responsible parties must implement to address sediment that poses unacceptable risk to human health and wildlife in the Columbia Slough. The 2005 ROD requires the City to control sources of pollution conveyed from private properties to the Slough through City stormwater pipes.

The City must implement these actions to meet state and federal requirements for cleanup of contaminated sediments in the Columbia Slough. This request addresses a regulatory requirement by supporting City compliance with required actions to clean up contaminated sediments in the Columbia Slough in response to requirements in the ROD and ongoing negotiations with DEQ.

Plans tied to this request include: Portland Watershed Management Plan, Columbia Slough Sediment Program Work Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	WSHI for Water Quality
o	Pollution Prevention Services KPM - Average resources spent in site investigations and cleanup, per site investigates or remediated


NPDES New Permit Sampling and/or Studies – TCWTP $96,748

Funding will provide for sampling and/or studies associated with a new Tryon Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant permit. Projected funding in FY 2016-17 would provide for efforts including Tier 1 Analysis, Nutrient Scan, Mixing Zone Study and Bioassay.

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plant Operation and Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Bureau KPM – Meet requirements of NPDES wastewater permits (CBWTP & TCWTP) and MOAs
"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
ES_04	Support for Continued Levels of Service													Environmental Investigations; Watershed Revegetation; Pumping and Treatment O&M; Admin Services				N	"SUPPORT FOR CONTINUED LEVELS OF SERVICE


Facility Maintenance $44,720

The Water Pollution Control Laboratory (WPCL) houses 73 full-time Pollution Prevention Services (PPS) employees in offices, shops, a laboratory, employee facilities and secured parking for 22 Bureau fleet vehicles and 2 boats.  Specialized facility technician services are required to maintain investment in the facility. On-site conference rooms are also used by local non-profits and neighborhood associations for community meeting space during non-business hours. 

In FY 2014-15, the interagency agreement (IA) with OMF-Facilities Services was reduced by 22% to accommodate a budget reduction request. Thirteen-percent of the reduction was realized through the Internal Material and Services (facility maintenance and repair), and 9% from Janitorial Services. This request will restore facility Internal Material and Services to prior service levels; provide effective and appropriate maintenance and repair by restoring appropriate facility service levels, significantly decreasing deferred maintenance and emergency repairs, thereby preventing long-term impacts on building equipment and systems. 

The WPCL systems and equipment are 19 years old and require increased maintenance service levels and equipment repairs. Failure to fund this request will result in continued marginal maintenance of facility equipment and systems and will increase future costs of deferred maintenance and repairs.  

Plans tied to this request include: Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs tied to this request include: Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Landscape Maintenance $20,000

In FY 2012-13, the interagency agreement (IA) with the Parks & Recreation Bureau to provide horticultural services at the Water Pollution Control Laboratory (WPCL) was reduced by 50% to accommodate a budget reduction request. Each year since, there has been a slight labor cost increase for service staff. The maintenance, safety and appearance of the WPCL grounds have been negatively impacted by these budget cuts such that remediation is required to clean-up overgrown plantings, replace older and dead plantings, and to mitigate the spread of invasive plant species.

The design, installation and maintenance of vegetation at the WPCL site play an important role in reduction of negative impacts to water quality at this critical location on the Willamette River.  This funding request will replace 19 year old plantings with hybrid-native vegetation to reduce maintenance requirements and will restore landscape service levels to provide effective ongoing maintenance. The resource will improve safety and appearance by keeping plantings trimmed in parking lots and on walkways, removing overgrown plantings and invasive species, and removing debris left by unauthorized campers and others. Failure to increase this funding will prevent improvements at WPCL and will increase future costs of deferred maintenance.

Plans tied to this request include: Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs tied to this request include: Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Coordinated Site Analysis (Engineering Technician I) (1.00 FTE) $71,532

The Coordinated Site Analysis (CSA) group performs an array of services related to monitoring, cleanup and management of contaminated and hazardous waste. CSA conducts preliminary, Phase-I, and Phase-II Environmental Site Assessments (ESA), remedial investigations, and feasibility studies and various other forms of ESAs tailored to specific projects. CSA provides technical review of various submittals, plans and reports to support City construction projects and property acquisition activities, and supports various bureaus by conducting all appropriate inquiry/due diligence as required. CSA provides these services during pre-design, design, construction, and ongoing maintenance phases of a wide variety of Capital Improvement Projects (CIP) projects. This work supports compliance with permit requirements for environmental protection and positively impacts health and safety for City employees and residents.

CSA has been operating under a static staffing of 4 FTE for over 10 years.  During this period, the project workload and project complexity has steadily increased due to the number of projects (specifically, more industrial hygiene, mold assessments, asbestos assessments, and hazardous materials investigations) from projects Citywide.  Due to the consistent increase in volume, tightening of project schedules, and the complexities of infrastructure construction, repair, and rehabilitation, additional in-house staff is requested to meet project and service expectations.

Failure to fund this increased staffing would result in an inefficient and reactive response strategy, increased utilization (and cost) of on-call contractors and/or decreased quality of service.

Plans:  Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs:  Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Tree Program (Environmental Tech I) (2.00 FTEs); (Environmental Tech II) (1.00 FTE) $233,472
 
The Environmental Services Tree Program (ESTP) began as a Grey to Green program in 2008. Since then, the program has evolved from a raw focus on the number of trees planted to a more strategic program focused on establishing trees as part of the Bureau’s infrastructure to sustainably manage stormwater, while also addressing citywide urban canopy goals. The ESTP focuses on providing services equitably, collecting and maintaining data, providing outreach to a broad clientele, and maintaining community partnerships. Functions to be performed by these positions are critical to meeting the requirements of the tree permit that we receive from Urban Forestry (under Title 11) which authorizes us to plant trees. The program has evolved from needing seasonal staff to a more mature program requiring skilled workers who can manage a highly varied workload, evaluate program effectiveness and recommend new strategies, work within a team, and develop and maintain excellent working relationships with individuals and community partners.   
 
This request converts funding for seasonal positions (-$227,160) to two Environmental Tech I and one Environmental Tech II positions (+$223,472) in order to meet the year-round, ongoing responsibilities associated with implementation of the ESTP. All positions have core responsibilities related to tree planting, data collection and analysis, and quality control monitoring, with additional responsibilities assigned to the Environmental Tech II position. 
 
Plans tied to this request include: Portland Watershed Management Plan, Climate Change Preparation Strategy, Tabor to the River/ Taggart D Basin Plan, Urban Forestry Management Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Watershed Services KPM - Number of Trees Planted


Maintenance – Treatment Plants $198,000

This funding will allow for timely and required mechanical, electrical and instrumentation maintenance on existing treatment plant assets to sufficiently meet levels of service.  The Bureau has been expanding its facilities over the last ten years with the completion of new projects such as the dry-weather clarifier expansion, Cogeneration, wet-weather screening house, CEPT, digester expansion, Portsmouth odor control facility, digester mixing and the secondary process improvements.  Active assets have increased from 6,543 in 2005 to 9,010 in 2015, yet additional funding to sustain the maintenance needs has not been adequate (and has not even included an inflationary increase).  Some critical infrastructure is reaching the end of its useful life resulting in additional maintenance and repair work until these assets can be addressed in the Capital Improvement Program, such as the CBWTP sludge processing belt filter press.  All of this is evidenced by an increased trend in consistent annual overspending on repair and maintenance supplies as indicated below.  
	Overspending	 Orig. Budget	%
FY15	(321,605)	944,220 	-34.06%
FY14	(220,689)	695,815 	-31.72%
FY13	(151,640)	780,815 	-19.42%
FY12	(66,778)	780,815 	-8.55%

Insufficient funding of repair and maintenance supplies can lead to deferring maintenance which results in an increased risk of asset failures, loss of revenue, and increased repair costs over the life of the asset. Failure to adequately invest in annual maintenance increases long-term costs, and negatively affects the Bureau’s ability to meet expected levels of service.

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	City Budget KPM – Costs to operate and maintain the treatment plant reflected in costs per million gallons
o	Wastewater KPM - NPDES compliance for CBWTP; NPDES permit compliance for TCWTP; % preventative plant maintenance work orders; Cost/Million gallons of wastewater; Cogen uptime; revenue from sale of methane to Malarkey


Fleet – Replacements, Renewable Clean Natural Gas <$288,000>

Scheduled replacement of Wastewater Services fleet vehicles improves operating and maintenance costs, enhances productivity and maximizes return on financial investment.  The current replacement schedule includes additional funding to convert some of the scheduled vehicle replacements to biofuel in preparation for a biogas fueling facility at CBWTP anticipated to be operational in FY 2017-18.  The Bureau has determined that resources for fleet vehicle conversions to accommodate biofuel can be held back during FY 2016-17.

Plans tied to this request include: Climate Action Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: n/a


Treatment Operations (Wastewater Operations Specialist) (1.00 FTE) $96,846

There are currently four Wastewater Operations Specialists (Op Specs) assigned to the treatment plants.  Necessary additions of equipment and systems have resulted in an increased workload, without the associated increase in staff to meet that workload expectations.  Op Specs are tasked with ensuring existing and new equipment is operating properly and that operational preventative maintenance is done on a timely basis.  Op Spec involvement with CIP projects requires appropriate scheduling and management to ensure treatment plant operations can be taken off-line or diverted for CIP work to happen without breaching the plant’s NPDES permit requirements. 

Additionally, operations' standard operating procedures (SOPs) need to be updated following completion of the Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan.  Updating SOPs is expected to mitigate a number of observed operational deficiencies, but will be a major undertaking.  

Without this additional staffing resource, the current Op Specs would not have sufficient time to complete and sustain the important work that directly impacts efficient and effective operation at the two treatment plants. 

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance Plan and CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include:  
o	Wastewater KPM – NPDES compliance for CBWTP; NPDES permit compliance for TCWTP; Cost/Million gallons of wastewater; % of total flow receiving secondary treatment; % BOD removed; % TSS removed; CEPT effluent quality - % BOD/TSS removed; Cogen uptime; revenue from sale of methane to Malarkey


Windows Tablet Mobilization $94,800

Since 2014, the City – under leadership from the Bureau of Technology Services (BTS) and with support from multiple participating bureaus – has pursued increased use of mobile devices to improve operational efficiency in appropriate circumstances. This request supports that service initiative by supplying 40 Windows mobile devices for use by selected work groups with staff who spend significant time away from a hard-wired workstations. The cost includes equipment purchases, initial set-up, and annual support from BTS.  Failure to fund this request will discourage the Bureau from using mobile technology to pursue operational efficiencies.

Plans tied to this request include:   Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs tied to this request include:  Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Infor Public Sector (Hansen) Mobile Solution $70,000

Since 2014, the City – under leadership from the Bureau of Technology Services and with support from multiple participating bureaus – has pursued increased use of mobile devices to improve operational efficiency in appropriate circumstances.  Inspection and maintenance data for the linear collection system is stored in Infor’s Hansen asset management system.  The data is typically written on paper in the field and later entered into the database in the office.  A few staff do use laptops with old technology that cannot capture all the necessary data.  Infor has developed a mobile version of their Hansen application that runs on Windows devices, which will require purchasing new licenses for the mobile software in addition to the Windows tablets hardware.  This request will provide funding to support the mobile module licenses and hardware.  Failure to fund this request will impede an opportunity to use mobile technology for operational efficiency.

Plans tied to this request include: Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.

KPMs tied to this request include: Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Office Support Specialist III $80,766

Due to prior staff reductions within BES Business Services and increased Citywide expectations regarding hiring/recruitment processes, the Bureau is currently challenged to keep pace with administrative service expectations.  Allowing vacancies and newly identified positions to remain unfilled means necessary work is unable to be performed and represents a cost and service inefficiency to the Bureau.  The City and the Bureau has identified equity and workforce development as a top priority, and the Bureau strives to actively support these initiatives.  Bureau support for these efforts is restricted when limited staff resources can only accommodate the minimum hiring requirements.  Additionally, the Administrative Services Program (in which this position will reside) is responsible for management of Bureau properties.  Requirements of staff for basic management of these properties has increased as unauthorized camping has become widespread on Bureau properties, and due to increased process requirements related to sale of surplus property.  The Office Support Specialist III will function as a “utility player” to assist the Bureau in keeping pace with increased expectations in hiring and recruitment, property management, workforce training, and other general administrative needs that support responsible operation of the Bureau. Failure to implement this position will curtail Bureau efforts to address cost and service inefficiencies and will limit the Bureau’s ability to meet City hiring and facility management expectations.

Plans tied to this request include: Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, Asset Management Report, and others.  

KPMs tied to this request include: Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.


Revenue Program (Sr. Administrative Specialist) (1.00 Limited Term Conversion to 1.00 FTE) $0

In an effort to treat all ratepayers fairly and equitably, the Bureau began a program in 2012 to use the ArcGIS system to electronically measure and store impervious area data for commercial and multi-unit properties. This program began with temporary part-time employees and later adjusted to a full-time two-year limited term position ($101,448) as a more efficient option. Additional revenue generated through identification of previously unbilled impervious area has been evidenced to exceed the annual cost of this position.

The Revenue Programs section estimates that the re-measure and correction of impervious area should be completed within the two years.  However, critical work requirements will continue.  The stormwater database will need to be audited using data from the Cayenta billing system to verify that all mapped information has been correctly transferred to the billing system and the Bureau must ensure data accuracy before eventually adding the mapped impervious area to portlandmaps.com and make it accessible to the public.  Maintenance of accurate stormwater management charges will continue to be an ongoing task even after the mapping data is verified as impervious areas in the city are not static but change as the city changes and development grows.  Additionally, new expectations related to property mapping and tracking are anticipated within the next 24 months, and the skills required of this position would support meeting those future obligations.

Ensuring consistency at this position will ensure that ratepayers are billed fairly and correctly for stormwater management based on measured impervious area, and that data is accurately and reliably assembled.  Failure to implement a long-term position risks re-creation of billing inefficiencies and inequity.

Plans tied to this request include: Supports Bureau-wide initiatives relative to the Portland Plan, Comp Plan, Climate Action Plan, Citywide Systems Plan, and others.  

KPMs tied to this request include: Supports multiple efforts that impact numerous Bureau-wide KPMs.
"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
ES_05	Capital Programs and Support													Asset Management; Engineering Design; Materials Test Lab; Stormwater System				N	"CAPITAL PROGRAMS and SUPPORT


Wastewater Treatment Engineering Design – Convert Existing Contract Position (Civil Engineer) (1.00) $134,946 ($134,946 within the CIP Program)

The Wastewater Engineering Design section consists of 17 City employees and two contractors.  One contractor was hired in 2009 and the second in 2013 to address what were originally thought to be shorter-duration project needs. Since then, additional needs have arisen as the Columbia Boulevard Wastewater Treatment Plant (CBWTP) approaches its 65th year in service.  The number of capital repair and maintenance projects has increased significantly at CBWTP and Tryon Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant (TCWTP) in recent years as condition assessments have discovered needed repairs, and on-going engineering staffing support is needed to design projects. Pump station and force main projects have also been identified that have been back logged due to inadequate staffing.  This position supports rehabilitation of aging infrastructure at Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTWs) and pump stations to meet permit requirements and KPMs. 

The bureau has utilized contractors to augment staffing levels for over 20 years. Contractors are used to provide expertise for which there is only a temporary need and to address fluctuating workloads.  Experience indicates that the cost for contract employees is generally comparable to city employees including benefits and overhead.  The City has long-standing union agreements to not use contract employees for work that has historically been done by represented City employees (with some exceptions). The proposed conversion of this position is consistent with the city’s commitments to the unions. The cost of this position is funded by reductions in contract resources.

Plans tied to this request include:  Public Facilities Plan, Comprehensive Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
1.1 Convey sewage to prevent releases
3.1 Comply with POTW limits for discharges to streams
3.3 Prevent sewage releases
5.1 Reinvest in system
6.2 Minimize odors
8.1 Meet requirements of NPDES permits and MOAs
8.2 Prevent combined sewer overflows (CSOs)
12.1 Beneficially reuse treatment process by-products


Material Testing Lab Support – Convert Existing Contract Position (Material Testing Technician II) (1.00 FTE) $90,408

The Materials Test Laboratory provides materials testing, inspection, and geotechnical services for both bureau projects and projects managed by other City bureaus. The Materials Testing Laboratory has 12 City employees and 4 contractors. The contractors work on an as-needed basis, but the work load has been fairly stable with 2 of the contractors working full time year around. The proposal is to convert one of the currently contracted positions to a full-time City employee in order to be more consistent with commitments made to the union in collective bargaining.  This position supports implementation of capital projects. The cost of this position is funded by reductions in contract resources.

Plans tied to this request include:  Public Facilities Plan, Comprehensive Plan 

KPMs tied to this request include:  
1.1 Convey sewage to prevent releases
3.3 Prevent sewage releases
5.1 Reinvest in system
8.1 Meet requirements of NPDES permits and MOAs
8.2 Prevent combined sewer overflows (CSOs)


Hydraulic Modeling – Convert Existing Contract Position (Civil Engineer) (1.00 FTE) $134,970 ($53,988 within the CIP Program)

The Asset Systems Management division has 21 City employees and 3 contractors. The three contractors have been employed full time for over 8 years. Originally, they were hired to provide expertise that was not available among City staff and was fairly difficult to obtain. At one time there were 5 contractors doing this work. In recent years, we have converted two of these positions to City employees and have gained some of the expertise in-house. 

There is a long-term and growing need for hydraulic modeling expertise to successfully design and operate the combined and separated collection systems to meet permit requirements and KPMs, thus it is appropriate to continue to convert these positions. Doing so one at a time makes sense because there is a learning curve that would overly tax current staff if more than one person were brought in at a time.

The hydraulic modeling position performs engineering analysis and hydrologic and hydraulic modeling; project cost/benefit analyses; alternative development and recommendation; supports CIP implementation and operating projects including System Planning efforts, Maintenance operations, Systems Development, Watershed and Stormwater projects.
In-house expertise is required in-house to develop sanitary and combined sewer system plan updates, and to implement capital improvement program (CIP) projects to meet permit requirements and KPMs. 

Plans tied to this request include:  Public Facilities Plan, Comprehensive Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
1.1 Convey Sewage to prevent releases
1.2 Eliminate flooding that impacts public safety
2.1 Increase stormwater retention
3.3 Prevent sewage releases
4.2 Improve fish passage
5.1 Reinvest in system
8.1 Meet requirements of NPDES permits
8.2 Prevent combined sewer overflows (CSOs)
10.1 Equitably distribute projects 


Private Property Retrofit Program:  Combined Basins $500,000

BES pursues opportunities to manage stormwater on private property in order to meet our levels of service, address gaps in the City’s stormwater system, and avoid future risk claims and potential law suits. The private property retrofit program has been demonstrated to be a cost-effective means of removing stormwater from the combined sewers, and for controlling local capacity issues that cause basement sewer back-ups. 

Ongoing benefits include cost-effective implementation of projects that meet regulatory requirements and improve customer service by reducing basement sewer backups. Private property retrofits can also result in an expansion of green infrastructure, supporting watershed health goals such as increased tree canopy. Addressing stormwater needs on private property may result in avoided costs of comparably more expensive expansions to the City-owned stormwater system. Using natural systems/green infrastructure is often less expensive than built/grey infrastructure, and provide benefits beyond managing volume, flow, and pollutants. Investing in private property retrofits generally results in private property owners being responsible for the long-term operating and maintenance costs of stormwater management infrastructure on their property. The FY 2015-16 budget for this work is $313,000 and this request adds $500,000 to that budget. The requested increase is based on system monitoring and the Public Facilities Plan. 

Failure to approve the increase will result in the bureau having to pursue more costly approaches to reducing flows or increasing capacity of the combined sewer system. Alternatively, not doing this work or not replacing it with other more costly methods would work against Bureau goals to reduce basement sewer backups and combined sewer overflows. 

Plans tied to this request include:   Portland Watershed Management Plan, Climate Change Preparation Strategy, Comp Plan/ Citywide Systems Plan, Public Facilities Plan

KPMs tied to this request include:   
1.1 Convey Sewage to prevent releases
1.2 Eliminate flooding that impacts public safety
2.1 Increase stormwater retention
2.2 Enable customers to manage stormwater onsite through private facilities
3.3 Prevent sewage releases
5.1 Reinvest in system
8.1 Meet requirements of NPDES permits
8.2 Prevent combined sewer overflows (CSOs)
10.1 Equitably distribute projects 
WSHI for Water Quality

"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
ES_06	Emergency Preparedness													Administrative Services; Pumping and Treatment O&M				N	"EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS


Maintenance – Emergency Generators $20,000

Annual funding is needed for a newly established predictive maintenance program for standby (emergency) generators to improve their reliability for running pump stations and other critical assets during times when electricity is lost.  Generator reliability is critical because if power is lost to the pump station and the standby generator fails to activate or operate properly, the pump station is not able to pump sewage which may result in health and safety hazards in the form of sewage on the ground or backup into basements. It could also result in NPDES permit violations due to resulting system overflows into bodies of water such as the Willamette River or Columbia Slough.  

Based on past experience and additional research, fuel in standby generators is typically not utilized regularly enough – so it attracts water and microbial growth which clogs filters resulting in generator failure and subsequent inability to run pump stations.  To better align the program with generator maintenance best management practices used by other city bureaus and collection system agencies it is necessary to implement a fuel testing and analysis program. This program includes a fuel test (test kit) every six months for water and microbial and annual comprehensive fuel sampling utilizing the LSD102 test to determine the condition of the fuel.  This will inform us as to whether we need to replace or polish the fuel to achieve 100% reliability of standby generators.

Plans tied to this request include: Wastewater Treatment Plants Operation and Maintenance Plan, CSO System Operating Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: 
o	Bureau KPM – Convey sewage to prevent releases to buildings or streets up to a 25 year storm frequency; Eliminate flooding that impacts public safety or private property for storm patterns that occur more frequently than 10-year return period
o	Wastewater Services KPM - % of time pump stations are capable of design capacity; % of days without pump station overflow due to failure


Emergency Preparedness $50,000

The majority of this funding is for emergency preparedness kits that will improve the resiliency and continuity of operations of the bureau in the event of a natural disaster.  Individual kits will be provided to every bureau employee to encourage personal emergency preparedness.  In addition, larger kits will be placed throughout the City at bureau reporting and alternate reporting locations.  Evidence from prior natural disasters indicate that agencies with unprepared employees have difficulty getting staff to remain at work locations and/or report to work to provide the responses to public services that are necessary during these events.  Additionally a smaller amount of funding is being requested to support miscellaneous on-going needs for the bureau emergency management program.  
 
Note: A $40,000 funding request was submitted in the FY 2015-16 Fall BMP to procure employee emergency preparedness kits. Because the CBO recommendation was to not fund the request it is being requested here for further consideration.

Plans tied to this request include: City Continuity of Operations Plan, BES Continuity of Operations Plan

KPMs tied to this request include: n/a

"	For City Plans and Key Performance Measures tied to this request see narrative above.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
ES_07	5% Reduction from General Fund for Trees													Stormwater System				N	This decision package reflects a 5% reduction from the General Fund contribution of $968,866 to the Bureau's Tree Program.	The loss of $48,443 to the FY 2016-17 budget will result in at least 100 fewer trees (~5% of FY 2015-16 planting target) planted under the community tree contract.  Because there will be a new contract in FY 2016-17, the actual loss could be greater.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
ES_08	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$316,868 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
$43,826 is added to the bureau budget to fund debt service for fueling station infrastructure improvements. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer. There is not net change in cost.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
ES_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ES_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FM	Fund and Debt Management																	C																																														
FM_01	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_02	Capital Set-Aside													Budget & Economics				N	Funding for an ongoing capital set-aside to address the City's infrastructure maintenance & replacement backlog.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_03	Increase Business License Tax													Budget & Economics				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_04	Bancroft Bond Excess Reserves																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_05	Unspent FY 2015-16 GF Contingency																	N	Carry over unspent contingency for Columbia River Levy project.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_06	Allocate Fuel Station Debt Payments to Bureaus																	N																														Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_07	Data Center Future Year Costs																	N																														Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_08	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Offset																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_09	FY 2015-16 Carryover: OVHD & PBEM Reserve																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FM_10	Adjustments to FY 2016-17 Contingency																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FR	Portland Fire & Rescue																	C																																														
FR_01	Eliminate four Rapid Response Vehicle Units													Emergency Operations				N	"This decision package will eliminate four Rapid Response Vehicle (RRV) units. This reduction is proposed in order to comply with the Mayor’s budget guidance requiring 5% reduction packages from General Fund bureaus.
In 2013-14, two regular, four-person companies were converted into four, two-person RRVs. Three RRVs operate in East Portland and the fourth serves North Portland. The RRV program focuses on lower-acuity healthcare or public assist calls. RRVs respond to Type 9 medical calls and Public Assist calls across the city. These are calls triaged by BOEC to be a non-emergency and RRVs travel Code 1 (no lights and sirens). RRVs also respond to a limited set of Type 3 medical calls that occur within their station’s response area. These medical calls require a quick response, but are typically situations that can be handled by a two-person unit rather than a four person-unit.
By responding to lower-acuity calls (Type 9, Public Assist, and some Type 3), the RRV program improves the response reliability of critical four person companies responding to fire, rescue, and medical calls where time and resources (staffing and equipment) are critical.
This reduction would eliminate 26 firefighter positions for savings of $2,480,000 in FY 2016-17.
"	"RRVs responded to approximately 7,700 calls in FY 2014-15. The elimination of the RRVs would shift this workload to remaining companies, including some of the busiest in the city as RRVs are strategically located at some of the busiest stations. Specifically, Engine 11 and Engine 7 already had the largest run volumes in PF&R in FY 2014-15 even with an RRV housed at the same station. Without an RRV to assist with the Public Assist, Type 9, and Type 3 calls, these engine companies would likely have 30% to 40% more annual unit responses.
Type 9 and Public Assist calls accounted for approximately 4,500 responses in FY 2014-15, or roughly 6% percent of PF&R’s incident total. RRVs responded to 69% of these calls in FY 2014-15. Without RRVs, remaining companies would need to respond to these lower acuity calls. In turn, this will make these units unavailable for higher acuity calls for service, requiring another unit to respond from a farther geographic distance, resulting in significantly longer response times. 
Response reliability has improved over the last few years as RRVs have responded to more lower-acuity calls, allowing engine and truck companies to remain available. For example, citywide response reliability was 91.7% in FY 2014-15 compared to 90.4% in FY 2010-11. Response reliability has improved most dramatically in those response areas with nearby RRVs. Station 24’s response reliability has increased from 87.9% in FY 2010-11 to 95.0% in FY 2014-15, and Station 19 has improved from 87.6% to 95.9% over the same time period. Eliminating the four RRVs, however, would erode those gains. PF&R data shows that response reliability is very important in maintaining low response times, as responses are about 90 seconds slower when a first-due unit is not available.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
FR_02																		N																														N			EXCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
FR_03	Close One Station/Company													Emergency Operations				N	This decision package would close one station or company and eliminate the associated staffing which includes one captain, two Lieutenants, and 10 firefighter positions.	"Any staffing reduction will have significant and immediate negative impacts on emergency response times and response reliability throughout the city. PF&R provides 24/7 fire and rescue services from a network of 30 neighborhood stations strategically located throughout the city. Each of the 30 stations serves a designated Fire Management Area (FMA). Currently PR&R maintains a minimum daily staffing level of 165, closing a station or company would reduce that number to 161.                                                                                                                                                          
Closing a station will adversely impact the FMA served by that station, and have a ripple effect on response time and response reliability across the city. Response time is defined as the time interval from dispatch to arrival on scene, and response reliability is the percentage of time a unit is available to take calls within its FMA.                                           
PF&R has a response time goal of 5:20 (5 minutes and 20 seconds) at the 90th percentile, meaning that for 90% of all responses an emergency response crew will arrive at or below 5:20. The current response time at the 90th percentile is 7:12, a difference of 1 minute and 52 seconds from the goal.  In terms of response reliability, which is the measurement of whether a first-due (closest unit) is available, the response reliability citywide was 91.7% in FY2014-15.                       
Response times within the closed station’s FMA will increase significantly, since units from adjacent stations will need to respond to calls in the vacated FMA, leading to longer travel times (the largest component of total response time) throughout all PF&R FMAs. Closing a station will decrease the response reliability from adjacent stations due to the additional call volume from the larger geographic area they would be covering. Adjacent stations will also be travelling farther distances from their home stations and experience an increase in total call volume, which will result in these stations not being available as often for calls within the FMA of the closed station and their own FMAs.  For example, when Station 23 closed in 2010, response times in the former service area increased as much as 2.30 minutes.                
These delays will pose significant risks for citizens involved in fires and other life-threatening emergencies. Depending on materials and furnishings, fires can double in size every minute, with flashover potentially occurring within two to four minutes.  In FY2014-15, 74% of structural fires were contained to the room of origin; closing stations and/or companies will adversely impact PF&R’s ability to contain fires to the room of origin.  In medical emergencies, brain death due to hypoxia (lack of oxygen) begins occurring within seven minutes. The ability to resuscitate a person from cardiac arrest decreases 10% with every minute advance life support measures are delayed. For anyone experiencing an emergency, the time it takes for PF&R to arrive is critical, and can ultimately affect the outcome for people needing emergency response services.                                                                                                                                                     
A station or company closure will impact PF&R’s ability to maintain its current Insurance Service Office (ISO) rating. Insurance companies use ISO fire protection ratings to determine home and business insurance premiums. PF&R was recently notified its ISO rating will remain at a Class 2, obtaining a score of 81.29 out of 100, which barely exceeds the minimum total score of 80.00 needed for a Class 2 rating. Additional budget cuts will likely result in a lower ISO rating which in turn would increase Portland residents and business’s property insurance rates 5-8% depending on construction and occupancy.   
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
FR_04	Close One Station/Company													Emergency Operations				N	This decision package would close one station or company and eliminate the associated staffing which includes one captain, two Lieutenants, and 10 firefighter positions.	"Any staffing reduction will have significant and immediate negative impacts on emergency response times and response reliability throughout the city. PF&R provides 24/7 fire and rescue services from a network of 30 neighborhood stations strategically located throughout the city. Each of the 30 stations serves a designated Fire Management Area (FMA). Currently PR&R maintains a minimum daily staffing level of 165, closing a station or company would reduce that number to 161.                                                                                                                                                         
Closing a station will adversely impact the FMA served by that station, and have a ripple effect on response time and response reliability across the city. Response time is defined as the time interval from dispatch to arrival on scene, and response reliability is the percentage of time a unit is available to take calls within its FMA.                                           
PF&R has a response time goal of 5:20 (5 minutes and 20 seconds) at the 90th percentile, meaning that for 90% of all responses an emergency response crew will arrive at or below 5:20. The current response time at the 90th percentile is 7:12, a difference of 1 minute and 52 seconds from the goal.  In terms of response reliability, which is the measurement of whether a first-due (closest unit) is available, the response reliability citywide was 91.7% in FY2014-15.                      
Response times within the closed station’s FMA will increase significantly, since units from adjacent stations will need to respond to calls in the vacated FMA, leading to longer travel times (the largest component of total response time) throughout all PF&R FMAs. Closing a station will decrease the response reliability from adjacent stations due to the additional call volume from the larger geographic area they would be covering. Adjacent stations will also be travelling farther distances from their home stations and experience an increase in total call volume, which will result in these stations not being available as often for calls within the FMA of the closed station and their own FMAs.  For example, when Station 23 closed in 2010, response times in the former service area increased as much as 2.30 minutes.              
These delays will pose significant risks for citizens involved in fires and other life-threatening emergencies. Depending on materials and furnishings, fires can double in size every minute, with flashover potentially occurring within two to four minutes.  In FY2014-15, 74% of structural fires were contained to the room of origin; closing stations and/or companies will adversely impact PF&R’s ability to contain fires to the room of origin.  In medical emergencies, brain death due to hypoxia (lack of oxygen) begins occurring within seven minutes. The ability to resuscitate a person from cardiac arrest decreases 10% with every minute advance life support measures are delayed. For anyone experiencing an emergency, the time it takes for PF&R to arrive is critical, and can ultimately affect the outcome for people needing emergency response services.                                                                                                                                                   
A station or company closure will impact PF&R’s ability to maintain its current Insurance Service Office (ISO) rating. Insurance companies use ISO fire protection ratings to determine home and business insurance premiums. PF&R was recently notified its ISO rating will remain at a Class 2, obtaining a score of 81.29 out of 100, which barely exceeds the minimum total score of 80.00 needed for a Class 2 rating. Additional budget cuts will likely result in a lower ISO rating which in turn would increase Portland residents and business’s property insurance rates 5-8% depending on construction and occupancy.   
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
FR_05	Increase Prevention Revenue													Prevention				N	"This decision package would provide a $50,000 increase in revenues annually by raising the fees of the Special User Permit Program to fully cover the program cost. 
The Special Use Permit Program is responsible for permits and inspections for special events such as trade shows, festivals, concerts, banquets, and outside tents. It also inspects after-hour assembly such as nightclub to prevent overcrowding and blocked exists. In addition, the program issues permits and inspects for tanks, piping, and processing involving hazardous materials, fueling, blasting, pyrotechnics, fireworks, and other high-risk activities. Currently the fees of the Special Use Permit Program fund approximately 90% of the program cost.
"	With this fee increase, the Special Use Permit Program would be fully cost recovery.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	REDUCTION											
FR_06	Restore ongoing funding for 13 positions													Emergency Operations				N	This decision package requests ongoing funding of $1.4 million for the remaining 13 positions that were eliminated in FY 2013-14 and have since been funded by the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant and other one-time resources, which will end on June 30, 2016.	Funding these 13 positions is not an enhancement to PF&R’s budget, rather it maintains the current service level. These positons have allowed PF&R to maintain a minimum daily staffing level of 165 since FY 2013-14. Without additional resources, PF&R will have 13 fewer firefighter positions and the daily staffing level will fall to 161 beginning July 1, 2016. The loss of these positions will result in a closure of a station, a company, or two RRVs, which will have many detriment public safety effects as identified in PF&R’s reduction decision packages.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
FR_07	Logistics/Prevention Relocation Partial Funding													Management Svcs/Logistics				N	"This decision package requests $3,000,000 to fund some of the costs related to the relocation of PF&R’s Logistics and Prevention facilities. 
The Logistics and Prevention facilities are located at 1135 SE Powell Boulevard and 1300 SE Gideon Street. The site consists of four major structures: Logistics administrative offices and the apparatus and building maintenance shops; a training tower; warehouse storage; and the Gideon Building that houses the Prevention Division’s Code Enforcement offices and permit center. The site is directly adjacent to the Clinton Station on the Portland-Milwaukie light rail line. Through the Central City 2035 Southeast Quadrant Plan, the City has identified PF&R’s property as a key area for redevelopment, which could potentially include affordable housing. As a result, the Logistics and Prevention facilities will need to be relocated. 
Functionally, PF&R needs an alternative centrally located facility for Logistics, Prevention and In-Service Training.  In-Service Training is located at 4800 NE 122nd Avenue in the Parkrose neighborhood, which is far away from the city center, resulting in significant out-of-service time for companies from the westside. The current training facility is at maximum capacity with isolated work spaces including two office and classroom trailers. The Logistics and Prevention facilities relocation provides an opportunity for PF&R to consolidate Logistics, Prevention and In-Service Training into one facility. Such a consolidation would reduce company out-of-service time and improve response reliability by allowing crews to train while mechanics perform apparatus maintenance.
PF&R is working with PDC and OMF/Facilities Services to explore relocation options. It is anticipated that sale proceeds of the current Logistics/Prevention property will be insufficient to cover the acquisition, design, and construction costs for a new facility.
Working with a real estate service company, OMF/Facilities Services has completed a property survey to identify potential locations, with one heavily preferred option. This request is to provide funding for earnest money, site survey, preliminary drawing and design.
"	"This request supports the Portland Plan’s Complete Neighborhoods goal and the Central City 2035 SE Quadrant Plan. Relocating PF&R from the current Clinton property allows for development that is better aligned with the City’s planning goals.  
Co-locating Logistics and In-Service Training would improve operational efficiency and reduce out-of-service time.
A new facility would also improve PF&R’s operations as the current site is largely outdated: 
•	The Logistics building was not upgraded in the 1998 bond package due to insufficient financial resources and has several maintenance needs including roof replacement. PF&R has delayed all major maintenance projects on the property in anticipation of redevelopment.
•	Equipment and uniform storage is fragmented in different locations rather than consolidated in single location.
•	The apparatus repair shop requires expansion as newer apparatus are too large to be accommodated. Additionally, a new repair shop with drive through bays would improve operations.
•	The Prevention building—built in 1905—needs many upgrades and does not have adequate square footage for inspectors to work and interface with external customers.
•	The storage building for emergency response equipment and supplies does not meet current seismic codes and shows signs of degradation.


"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
FR_08	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$39,567 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded with an increase in General Fund discretionary
$5,309 is added to the bureau budget to fund debt service for fueling station infrastructure improvements. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. There is not net change in cost."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FR_09	Solar Additions Station 1																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FR_10	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Innovation Fund Carryover																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FR_11	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
FR_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
FR_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR	Office of Government Relations																	C																																														
GR_01	Hatfield Fellow													Government Relations				N	The requested package restores $35,000 in funding to hire a Portland State University Hatfield Fellow for FY 16-17.   This position was funded in the FY 15-16 budget to add much-needed capacity to the program.  The Fellow assists with welcoming international delegations including visiting students, ambassadors, and elected officials from around the world.  The Fellow also helps support Portland's Sister City program, writes the program's quarterly newsletter, and helps with ensuring that all gifts received by the city from international visitors are appropriately logged and inventoried per city regulation.	The expected results of the decision package include:  meeting performance targets and strategic priorities of the international relations program.  Specifically, the Fellow would add capacity to meet and prepare for visiting delegations of students, ambassadors, and elected officials from around the world.  These delegations have a substantial economic impact on Portland’s tourism economy.  The Fellow also provides support Portland’s Sister City program, writes the program’s first quarterly newsletter, and helps with ensuring that all gifts received by the city from international visitors are appropriately logged and inventoried per city regulation.  Without the Fellow, the office would not be able to provide the current level of support to the Sister Cities program, would not be able to publish a newsletter and would need to find other ways to meet the city’s gift inventory regulations.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
GR_02	5% Reduction package													Government Relations				N	"Per FY 16-17 budget guidance, the Office of Government Relations is submitting a 5% reduction package in the amount of $70,791.  This position was funded in the FY 15-16 budget to add much needed capacity to the program.  The Fellow assists with welcoming international delegations including visiting students, ambassadors, and elected officials from around the world.  The Fellow also helps to support Portland’s Sister City program, writes the program’s quarterly newsletter, and helps with ensuring that all gifts received by the city from international visitors are appropriately logged and inventoried per city regulation.  

The other half of the reduction package includes cuts to interim legislative outreach, travel to Washington DC in support of the city’s federal priorities, employee continuing education and professional development, and supplies for the International Relations program.
"	"Losing the Hatfield Fellow funding would increase the workload demands on the International Relations Director, the only dedicated staff for the program.  The office adopted three strategic priorities for international relations in its five-year strategic plan 2016-2020 and the priorities would be difficult to achieve without the additional capacity provided by a Fellow.  The loss of the Fellow would also negatively impact the office’s equity goals in terms of creating opportunities for people of color in political positions and supporting key international relations events that involve immigrant and refugee communities.  Other expected results of the reduction package include: reduced advocacy opportunities in Washington DC to lobby for the city’s federal priorities, reduced opportunities for employee training and professional development, and fewer supplies to support international relations events at the city.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
GR_03	OMF IA Balancing													Government Relations				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget: $242 for Strategic Technology Pass Through, $45 for Fuel Station debt service, and $25,916 for City Hall rental rate adjustment.
$917 for the bureau’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
GR_04	International Relations													Government Relations				N																														N			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
GR_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
GR_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC	Portland Housing Bureau																	C																																														
HC_01	Program Design & Development Coordinator													Fair Housing				N	This package addresses the need for a Policy and Program Development Coordinator. The City is taking steps to adapt existing programs and develop new programs to respond to an increasing proportion of renter households in the city and the increasing demand for affordable housing units. The City is currently pursuing, or has already adopted, initiatives related to the establishment of preference policies and affirmative fair marketing, a voluntary incentive zoning program, a mandatory inclusionary zoning program, an affordable housing linkage fee program, increased renter protections, and others. These initiatives require additional staff support to develop the program detail and manage their implementation within the Bureau. Funding for the FTE position will come from existing URA and grant funds.	"Responsibilities and deliverables will include:
•  Development of program materials and other administrative infrastructure;
•  Drafting program and administrative rules;
•  Development of training materials and administering trainings for bureau staff and service provider staff;
•  Coordinating program implementation across City bureaus; and
•  Coordinating the implementation of preference policies, tenant placement and affirmative fair marketing of affordable     housing financed directly or indirectly by PHB.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
HC_02	Citywide Rental Housing Development													Housing Investment Production & Preservation				N	Year-over-year rent rates throughout Portland have increased by 12.6%, putting many cost-burdened households at risk of displacement or homelessness. Moreover, the A Home For Everyone Coordinating Board has identified the importance of linking development initiatives with supportive services, thereby creating a sustainable model that helps low-income households exiting homelessness. A General Fund allocation for citywide affordable housing preservation and development would allow the greatest flexibility in serving those residents most in need who are currently facing displacement and/or homelessness. These resources will allow the Bureau to take advantage of opportunities to complement the additional investment made through A Home For Everyone for the benefit of those exiting homelessness by building or purchasing units citywide, and targeting resources where the Bureau can currently only provide limited programming, if any at all. One-time funds are an effective way to make capital investments that secure long-term affordability in rental housing.	This package would support the development of approximately 100 such units intended for those experiencing homelessness and/or those at risk of displacement.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
HC_03	AHFE - Expanded Veterans Assistance													Housing Access & Retention				N	The package is the City's contribution of a total investment of $575,000 that includes the contribution from Multnomah County - as proposed by AHFE Coordinating Board and accepted by AHFE Executive Committee. These funds leverage significant federal program dollars and allow us to maintain the necessary capacity to ensure that homelessness among Veterans is rare, brief and one time.	This request expands Veterans assistance to increase year-round shelter for Veterans by 10 beds and increase short- and long-term rental assistance to help at least 30 additional Veterans obtain and maintain permanent housing.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
HC_04	AHFE - Safety Off The Streets													Housing Access & Retention				N	The package is the City's contribution of a total investment of $4,925,000 that includes the contribution from Multnomah County - as proposed by AHFE Coordinating Board and accepted by AHFE Executive Committee.  The requested funds will allow for some start-up capital expenses, but are assumed to primarily pay for ongoing shelter operating expenses. These funds will pay for only very limited on-site support services at each shelter site. The package will continue the one-time General Fund shelter investment ($1.2 million) from the FY 2015-16 fall BuMP, that included the Jerome Sears Shelter and Peace Shelter.	"The City’s portion of the investment will provide at least 315 safe sleeping options in a combination of facility-based shelter and alternative shelter options to highly vulnerable people lacking access to permanent housing, including women, women escaping domestic violence, people of color, and people with severe mental illness.

The full $4,925,000 investment will provide at least 630 safe sleeping options in a combination of  facility-based shelter (approximately 410 beds) and alternative shelter options (approximately 265 beds), to highly vulnerable people lacking access"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
HC_05	AHFE - Perm Housing Placement - Rapid Re-Housing													Housing Access & Retention				N	"This package specifically addresses the Rapid Rehousing portion of the AHFE Permanent Housing Placement program.  PHB funded the Permanent Supportive Housing portion of the program with $1,662,500 in the ongoing General Fund adjusted base (making the total City contribution $6,150,000). The total investment of $12,300,000 for Rapid ReHousing and Permanaent Supportive Housing includes the contribution from Multnomah County - as proposed by AHFE Coordinating Board and accepted by AHFE Executive Committee. 

The resources for Rapid ReHousing will increase permanent housing placements for highly vulnerable populations including Communities of Color, women (unaccompanied or with children), women escaping domestic violence, and female youth. Services will include short-term rental assistance, housing placement and retention staff support, and income acquisition assistance through employment and long term benefits access.
"	The City’s portion of the investment will provide Rapid Re-housing rent support and services for 565 individuals or 297 households.  The entire $12,300,000 program including the Multnomah County contribution), will provide Rapid Re-housing or Permanent Supportive Housing rent support and services for 1,320 households.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
HC_06	AHFE - Homelessness Prevention & Diversion													Housing Access & Retention				N	The package is the City's contribution of a total investment of $2,200,000 that includes the contribution from Multnomah County - as proposed by AHFE Coordinating Board and accepted by AHFE Executive Committee.  The funding will increase prevention and diversion for highly vulnerable populations, including Communities of Color, women, families with children, and individuals with significant physical and mental health disabilities. Assistance will take the form of rental assistance, professional staffing to support housing placement and retention, legal assistance/tenant advocacy, and transportation assistance.	This package would prevent or divert from homelessness for least 500 additional people or 263 households in FY 2016-17. The total investment of $2.2 million would serve 1,000 individuals.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
HC_07	AHFE - Lead Agency Placeholder													Housing Access & Retention				N	As part of the A Home for Everyone (AHFE) initiative the concept of a lead agency that would facilitate service delivery, manage program and policy development, and provide budget recommendations to government partners has been part of the discussion.  The current proposal is for the lead agency to be located at Multnomah County as an office reporting directly to the County Chair.  City funding would flow to the County via an IGA managed by the Portland Housing Bureau (PHB). This package serves as a placeholder at this time, as discussions regarding governance and flow of funds are ongoing at the time of budget submission. The package assumes no net cost to the City, though no decisions have been made regarding cost sharing.	Improved implementation of the City and County’s shared policy priorities, improved responsiveness to community need, increasing consistency and transparency, and improved outcomes for those experiencing homelessness.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
HC_08	Shift Lents URA Home Rep/Ownership Progams to GF													CDHMRT				N	"This package would shift funding used for home repair and home buyer subsidy programs plus related staffing and indirect costs in the Lents Urban Renewal Area (URA) to General Fund ongoing.  This would allow the bureau to use the funding in areas of East Portland outside of the URA.  Lents URA funds would be freed up for rental housing development and/or homeownership development in the Lents URA. The funds being shifted are not part of the ""TIF Lift"" that added additional affordable housing set-aside funds to the Lents URA. Those funds will be programmed based upon community feedback in the spring of 2016.
"	These shifts maximize program flexibility and will likely to result in program outcomes over and above prior year performance.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_09	Shift CDBG for Homeownership to GF													CDHMRT				N	Replace CDBG funds used to administer homeownership programs through local partners ($285,000) with General Fund within the adjusted base (ongoing).	"Use the CDBG funds freed up as part of a fall 2016 rental development NOFA, as well as being available for future development projects to leverage new units.

These shifts maximize program flexibility and will leversage 15 additional units of housing over the five year forecast.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_10	East Portland Homeownership Assistance (New)													CDHMAS				N	This package is intended to address the other factors contribute to involuntary displacement among vulnerable homeowners, such as predatory real estate and lending practices, barriers to appropriate refinancing options, mounting property taxes and utility fees, complications in estate planning. Providing funding for homeowner retention services, including legal aid, estate planning services, outreach and education around predatory real estate and lending practices, and assistance navigating existing community resources.	Homeowner assistance services ($300,000) will be added within the adjusted base (ongoing) to provide over 300 homeowners with retention case management, provided through community partners.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_11	East Portland Home Repair (New)													CDHMRT				N	Current census data shows more than 3,000 low-income homeowners over the age of 70 live in East Portland neighborhoods that fall outside the urban renewal boundaries. Many of these elderly homeowners may be in need of help addressing emergency home repairs to keep them living safely in their homes. As neighborhood revitalization moves east from the urban core, these households are becoming increasingly susceptible to involuntary displacement.	To begin to address these issues, new home repair programming ($500,000) will be added within the adjusted base (ongoing) to serve East Portland low-income homeowners living outside of urban renewal area boundaries.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_12	Fair Housing Program Enhancements (New)													CDHCAS				N	This package serves to address underserved populations,including $35,000 for the Safe Housing Project to organize non-English speaking residents in substandard private-market housing to collectively request needed repairs without risking their housing. An additional $5,000 to enable Legal Aid Services of Oregon (LASO) to direct their outreach and training to culturally specific community partners in order to increase utilization of their programs by underserved communities.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_13	Women's Winter Shelter (15-16)													CDEHES				N	This package continues the FY 2015-16 one-time packages to continue the Women's Winter Shelter year-round.	Provides 115 shelter beds.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
HC_14	Intensive Street Engagement (15-16)													CDEHES				N	This package would continue the Intensive Street Engagement package from FY 2015-16.	Funding would move 50 high barrier households into housing and providing campsite cleanup.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
HC_15	Veteran's Rent Assistance (15-16)													CDEHRA				N	This package would continue funding for the Veteran's Rent Assistance from FY 2015-16.	Funding would continue 20 low barrier shelter beds and providing prevention or placement services for 150 Veterans.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
HC_16	Landlord Recruitment (15-16)													CDEHRA				N	This package would continue the Landlord Recruitment package from FY 2015-16.	Funding would increase the number of affordable rental units available to people exiting homelessness.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
HC_17	Shift CDBG for Fair Housing to GF													CDHCAS				N	Replace CDBG funds used to administer fair housing programs through local partners ($113,000) with General Fund within the adjusted base (ongoing).																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_18	Realign HOME funding for rental assist. - plug													Housing Access & Retention				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_19	New Rental Rehab in East Portland - plug													Preservation & Asset Management				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
HC_20	OMF IA Balancing													CDASB				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$10,202 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
HC_21	Diversion Program													Shelter & Emergency Services				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
HC_22	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Rebudget Resources													Multiple				N	"PHB is requesting Council approve the rebudgeting of project resources from the current fiscal year to the next. The reductions are necessary for two primary reasons. First, for the sake of transparency, prior to awarding funds PHB budgets available opportunity funding despite awareness that much of the funding is unlikely to be disbursed in the fiscal year it is awarded. Second, changes in loan closing or construction reimbursement schedule of individual projects necessitate the rebudgeting of resources. Pending Council approval, the following list represents the majority of resources to be rebudgeted into FY 2016-17 in the Approved Budget:

• $5,700,000 – Opportunity Funding (CDBG, HOME & TIF sources)
• $3,088,508 – Miracles-Central (TIF Convention Center)
• $3,000,000 – N/NE Initiative Land Banking (TIF Interstate)
• $2,500,000 – FY 2015-16 Housing Development Decision Package (HIF)
• $1,950,000 – Hill Park (CDBG)
• $ 993,962 – Gresham & Multnomah County HOME Consortium Resources (HOME)
• $ 505,839 – New Meadows (TIF Interstate)
• $ 371,454 – 14th & Raleigh (TIF River District)
• $ 319,000 – Lead Paint Hazard Reduction Program (Federal)"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
HC_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
HC_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF	Office of Management and Finance																	C																																														
MF_01	FAC - Portland Building Reconstruction													Facilities				N	"In October of 2015, the Council approved Resolution #37158 in which OMF was directed to complete the Portland Building Reconstruction project by the year 2020 for a cost not to exceed $195 million.  $12.8 million is required for projected FY 2016-17 costs for an owner’s representative contract, an architectural and engineering design services under a progressive Design-Build-Relocate contract, staff costs, and other design phase costs. 

This project will be funded through four resources.  No funding from tenants will be required in FY 2016-17.
1.  The first is the $3.75 million from the Portland Building’s major maintenance account.
  
2. The second is the $2.57 million that was put into the General Fund’s five year financial forecast by the Council as part of the FY 2015-16 budget process.  

3. The third resource is capturing a portion of the Portland Building rental charges that are in the budgets for the tenants and will not be needed during construction when the project will cover interim space costs.  These first three resources will allow the project to have at least five percent of its costs funded through cash as per City financial policies.

4. The fourth resource is from proceeds from debt financing.  The debt financing plan is being developed and will depend on a number of factors.

A preliminary project expense forecast through 2020 has been completed and it shows that $12.8 million of costs will be incurred in FY 2016-17.  This will be funded through the remainder of the $3.75 million of major maintenance funds dedicated to the project, $2.57 million of General Fund resources and debt financing. 

The $195 million project will be included in the OMF FY 2016-17 through FY 2021-22 Capital Improvement Plan.  Concurrently with the submission of the Capital Improvement Plan, OMF’s FY 2016-17 Requested Budget will include a $12.8 million funding request for project costs estimated to be incurred in FY 2016-17.



"	The $12.8 million will allow the City to meet anticipated obligations under the owners representative and progressive Design-Build-Relocate contracts which are expected to be brought before Council in 2016.  Additionally, this package will allow the project to continue to progress as planned in order to meet the 2020 construction completion timeframe as well as the not to exceed cost of $195 million as required by Resolution #37158.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
MF_02	FAC - 5% Reduction - City Hall Major Maintenance													Facilities				N	The Facilities City Hall Major Maintenance reserve is funded by a cash transfer from the General Fund, and is subject to the 5% reduction requirement. This decision package would reduce ongoing major maintenance collection for City Hall by $10,601. The City Hall Major Maintenance reserve funding is used to replace failing or out of date building systems, controls, equipment, and structures.	"The City Hall Major Maintenance fund is currently projected to have $3.6M worth of unfunded projects over the next five years due to multiple major maintenance projects, including necessary HVAC replacement and roof replacement projects. The current City Hall HVAC units have reached the end of their useful life and individual units fail on a regular basis.  The roof is showing signs of failure and needs to be replaced before there is water damage to the interior of the building.  Currently, there is not enough funding for both projects.  Other important projects, not as critically necessary, have already been pushed to future years due to lack of funding.  There are no other budgeted sources of funding for major maintenance on this building, other than savings at year end from operations and maintenance at City Hall.

The reduction to the City Hall Major Maintenance reserve will likely result in increased operating costs to maintain inefficient structures, systems, and equipment for timeframes that extend past their useful lives. Additionally, repair costs could increase due to damage as a consequence of delayed projects. The reduction would be in direct opposition of goal 11 of the OMF Strategic Plan, to secure adequate and sustainable funding to maintain and replace critical technology and facilities infrastructure, and it would impair the goal of providing quality customer service to City Hall customers and citizens that use the facility.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
MF_03	FAC - 5% Reduction - Jerome Sears Bldg O&M													Facilities				N	The Facilities Division within the Bureau of Internal Business Services is reponsible for coordinating operations and maintenance services at the Jerome Sears Building.  This program is funded by a cash transfer from the General Fund and is subject to the 5% reduction requirement.  This decision package would reduce funding for operations and maintenance at the Jerome Sears Building by 5%.  Building and equipment failures at this site will still be addressed.	This decision package would reduce operations and maintenance funding for the Jerome Sears Building.  Currently, this building is being used as a temporary houseless neighbors shelter at Council direction to address the homelessness issue that Portland is facing.  The long-term function of the building is to become the Westside Staging area for emergency operations.  Reductions will be applied to preventative maintenance service levels so that available funding can be used for equipment failures.  This reduction would be in direct opposition of goal 11 of the OMF Strategic Plan, to secure adequate and sustainable funding to maintain and replace critical technology and facilities infrastructure, and it would impair the goal of providing quality customer service to future City customers and citizens that use the facility.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
MF_04	FAC - 5% Reduction - Yeon Building O&M													Facilities				N	This program is funded by a cash transfer from the General Fund and is subject to the 5% reduction requirement.  This decision package would reduce funding for operations and maintenance at the John Yeon Building at McCall Waterfront Park by five percent. There are no other budgeted sources of funding for operations or major maintenance on this building.	Current funding for the building is not enough to properly operate and maintain the building.  Reductions would be applied to preventative maintenance service levels so that remaining funding will be available to address building and equipment failures.  There are no other budgeted sources of funding for operations or major maintenance on this building.  This reduction would be in direct opposition of goal 11 of the OMF Strategic Plan, to secure adequate and sustainable funding to maintain and replace critical technology and facilities infrastructure, and it would impair the goal of providing quality customer service to City Hall customers and citizens that use the facility.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
MF_05	FAC - 5% Reduction - Mayor's Security													Facilities				N	This program is funded by a cash transfer from the General Fund and is subject to the 5% reduction requirement.  Specific service level reductions have not been identified at this time.	If requirements exceed funding available, Facilities may have to direct funding away from other City Hall operational needs.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
MF_06	BTS Vertical Applications Analyst – BDS													Production Services				N	This position is requested by and will be funded by Bureau of Development Services (BDS). This Application Analyst III position in BTS Vertical Applications (Business Solutions Division) will help with the increased workload associated with implementation and support of the new Information Technology Advancement Project (ITAP) permitting system and associated technology at BDS.  There is currently a filled limited-term position in place. This permanent position will support the ITAP system for both the one-time project and ongoing sustainment and will also be supporting the current permitting system TRACS.  BDS identified this position as a significant issue due to the complexity of the ITAP system and the switch to a Microsoft web application platform.  BDS is requesting the position and this decision package matches their request.	"Without this position, BDS will continue to support TRACS in a limited and reduced capacity, thus affecting the services provided to Bureau customers and citizens. This will also affect the implementation of ITAP as it will reduce the ability for the application team to  support the new system after it goes live. This will likely result in delays to make necessary changes to the new ITAP system once the vendor has left and will impact the service that BDS provides to the development community and that the City provides to its citizens.  
"																												Y			INCLUDE	08	ADDS											
MF_07	BTS - Electronic Equipment Replacement													Communications				N	"This decision package creates an ongoing replacement funding mechanism for bureau electronic equipment such as portable and mobile radios, video systems, radar guns, mobile computers, and other equipment maintained by the Bureau of Technology Services (BTS).  BTS customers have expressed a need for replacement funding for equipment in addition to PCs and laptops and to avoid spikes in expenses when replacement is needed.  This would provide a stable funding source for the replacement of equipment and create maintenance cost savings by replacing equipment at the end of its useful life. OMF will request a target adjustment for General Fund bureaus. 

Prior to FY 2013-14, BTS had included a component for replacement in its interagency rates for electronic equipment.  For customers of BTS, that replacement component meant that a portion of their internal service payments to BTS would be set aside in a replacement fund on their behalf.  The funds would then be held until needed to purchase new equipment to replace worn out, unsupported, or obsolete equipment.  In FY 2012-13, the replacement component on equipment related to the 800 MHz radio system was eliminated as a budget reduction.  In FY 2013-14, a similar reduction was made for video systems and other non-800 MHz equipment.  BTS customer bureaus are aware that their interagency rates no longer include replacement and that their replacement balances have been drawn down over the last three years.  This practice is not sustainable.  Customers have expressed concern to BTS and have stated that given the option of planning for and collecting replacement funds on an ongoing bases versus the spending spikes experienced when having to buy replacement equipment from operating budgets, their preference is to reinstate the replacement rate collection.  The 2014 Moss Adams OMF Assessment and Study recommended restoration of replacement funding.

This package also requests a General Fund target adjustment, totaling $1,875,501, for the General Fund bureaus."	Implementation of this decision package in the FY 2016-17 Adopted Budget will allow BTS customer bureaus to plan for the future replacement of their electronic equipment.  The replacement schedule for this equipment varies depending on the equipment type, when it was purchased, how it was used, changes in technology, etc.  The current system, in which bureaus must directly purchase replacement equipment from their budgets, leads to spending spikes and planning challenges, particularly in the case of a large-scale replacement or equipment upgrade need.  In some cases, budget constraints may force bureaus to choose not to replace equipment that has reached the end of its useful life.  In these cases, maintenance costs go up or the equipment may become so obsolete that repair is no longer an option, leaving bureau personnel without necessary equipment.  In cases involving public safety, that scenario could prove dangerous to both personnel and the public.  By including replacement funding as part of a bureau's interagency, a replacement schedule is established where a bureau will contribute an amount each year based on the equipment's estimated value and lifecycle.  When replacement is included in the rates, the rates reflect the true cost of service and the true cost of the asset.  Bureaus benefit through the prevention of spending spikes when the equipment has reached the end of its useful life because there is no additional expense to the bureau beyond what they have already contributed to replace it.  This not only allows for bureaus to budget in a predictable and consistent manner, but it also helps ensure that the equipment used by public safety and public service personnel is reliable and in good working order.  Funds held by BTS on behalf of customer bureaus generate interest revenue which is put back into each bureau's replacement account to further increase those funds which they have set aside.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	ADDS											
MF_08	BTS - Data Center Move													Production Services				N	"The Portland Building Data Center (located on the 3rd floor) is the City's primary data center.  It houses components for nearly every City service as well as secondary systems for 911 dispatch and Police Records Management.  It was constructed by retrofitting an office building environment to contain a data center.  It does not meet the construction standards for an enterprise-level data center in terms of power, cooling, cabling, or security.  In current operations, it occasionally experiences lack of resiliency for power and cooling components, which could result in a partial or complete unplanned system shutdown requiring several days to recover.  In a worst case scenario, the data center's systems could be destroyed by natural disaster, resulting in a total loss of all equipment and data within the room and a potential three month recovery period.

This Data Center Move project would execute full requirements analysis (with third party assistance) and create an RFP to obtain geographically dispersed third-party data center hosting services.  Applications and data would be migrated to third-party facilities, and disaster recovery capabilities for critical systems would be established with data centers outside of our region.  Disaster recovery planning and documentation for critical systems would be established, including confirming expected levels of service.

There is a need to mitigate the ongoing issues and concerns with the existing facility's power, cooling, cabling, and security.  The Data Center Move is related to the Portland Building Reconstruction project.  The current estimate for the project is a low confidence figure of $9.7 million.  BTS is in the process of hiring a consultant who will develop a high confidence project plan and cost estimate. The consultant will also provide an estimate of the ongoing support costs. The amount being asked of bureaus in FY 2016-17 is a total of $2 million.  The financial phase-in is based on a low confidence total project estimate of $9.7 million, with $2 million in FY 2016-17, $6 million in FY 2017-18, and $1.7 million in FY 2018-19.  OMF will analyze financing options once there is a detailed project plan."	"Failure to move the data center before construction in the Portland Building would subject the City's information technology capabilities to significant risk of unplanned outages.  If disaster recovery capabilities are not implemented, the City's ability to operate critical information technology systems could be impacted for two to three months in the event of a disaster, assuming the disaster did not also affect the data center at the Portland Communications Center.  If the disaster impaired both data centers, permanent loss of critical data would be a strong possibility. This project would remediate unplanned service interruptions associated with the renovation of the building, and to eliminate costs otherwise required to reconstruct a data center within the Portland Building.

By moving the City's primary data center to a resilient hosted facility that can provide higher service levels for power, cooling, and security, the City will be able to achieve higher availability for servers and data, allowing City bureaus to continue providing services in the event of a minor interruption event such as a power or cooling outage.

By combining this move with out-of-region disaster recovery capabilities for identified critical servers, City bureaus will have the ability to continue to use their applications and data even in the event of a regional disaster, needing only an operational internet connection.  This would enable the City to focus on assisting customers and repair activities, rather than focusing on operating without data and applications available.  Even for non-critical applications, this provides the capability to recover applications and data at a later time with minimal loss of data.

These data center capabilities would also provide the functionality to deploy additional applications and data needed during a disaster event on an as-needed basis. 

By continuing to have applications and data available, it greatly increases the likelihood that the City will be able to meet local, state, and federal obligations regarding payroll, accounting, tax information, etc., as well as helping to ensure the ongoing security of the City's data and customer information.  It also opens up opportunities for collaboration with other local governments on event response and disaster recovery needs.

This package supports the following Citywide IT Strategic Plan goals: 1.2 Demand and Capacity Management; 3.1 Support Business Continuity; 3.2 Implement Disaster Recovery; and 3.3 Implement IT Best Practices.  This package supports OMF Strategic Plan Goal 9 - ""Develop a roadmap to effectively leverage existing technology and adopt emerging technology to meet citywide business needs."""																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS	ONETIME										
MF_09	BO-Maintain required svcs:add rev/cut costs													Business Operations				N	"Business Operations provides required financial management, communications and administrative services to OMF bureaus and divisions, as well as City Council offices and three Council programs (COCL-COAB, Gateway Domestic Violence Center, Youth Violence Prevention).  The Division also staffs nine committees, four of which are Council-appointed.  

This decision package would reduce resources by $93,847 and offset that with reductions to BTS ($13,555) and Facilities ($22,792) interagency agreements, increased revenue from the Office for Community Technology ($10,000) and increased revenue from the Innovation Fund ($47,500).  The last item would require recommendation from the Innovation Fund Review Panel and approval from the City Council through additional actions in the fall. 

• Business Operations completes required work:
o 5 daily deadlines – cash handling, media/public records requests, 12th floor reception for 95 employees, accounts payable for approximately 25,000 invoices a year
o 3 weekly deadlines – project status reports, Speaker Series
o 5 bi-weekly deadlines – timekeeping for 176 employees, personnel administration for 262, FMLA processing for 471; OMF Leadership Team 
o 11 monthly deadlines – staff 9 Committees (four Council-appointed), Technology Oversight Committee (TOC) report to CAO, accounting period projections for 28 groups, Bureau Directors, Business Hour
o 6 quarterly deadlines – budget report submission for 28 groups, TOC report to Council, Innovation Fund marketing, Review Panel and reports
o 6 semi-annual deadlines – OMF workplan, AA/EEO reports, charitable campaign, internal audits, file review
o 6 annual deadlines – 81 year-end audit schedules, OMF and Business Operations policy and procedure reviews, equity budget tool and roadmap, performance measures, Independent Citizens Committee, Socially Responsible and BAC reports.  Cutting a position to meet the budget reduction would require transferring the required work to another group.  Instead we re-examined our BTS and Facilities interagencies and see that we could reduce the BTS IA by $13,555 and reduce the Facilities IA by $22,792.  We will increase the interagency revenue by $10,000 for work performed for the Office for Community Technology to our minimum contribution of $25,000.  We also propose receiving $47,500 in revenue from the Innovation Fund for administering the program.  This request will be made to the Innovation Review Panel in the fall of 2016.            
"	"This decision package would allow the Business Operations Division to maintain required service delivery to our 38 direct clients.  Business Operations provides financial management and monitoring for 14 OMF funds, 9 organizations in the General Fund, 5 Council Offices and 3 Council Office programs.  Accepting this reduction would allow the Division to continue to perform required work and achieve the efficiencies gained by centralizing services for financial management, communications and administrative services for these clients.  If these services were performed in the individual bureaus, divisions and offices we serve, it would result in higher costs to maintain staff with all the necessary roles and responsibilities.  

In addition to providing financial management and monitoring, Business Operations has taken on the following new initiatives:

• Customer communications: OMF Navigator, customer service check-ins, interagency checkups, small bureau check-ins.
• Business Hour meetings: Started monthly meetings and website in December 2014.
• Interagency billing: Support center hours to help financial staff started October 2015.
• Fee study: Completed a review of comparable BTS and BIBS fees; shared study results with customers
• Training and education: Speaker Series, OMF Equity Series, PSU trends symposium, City-wide leadership/communication sessions opened to other City bureaus; increased frequency of Bureau Director work sessions.
• In-house training: Conducted a leadership discussion series; conducting a writing at work series; conducting in-house training in financial processes and management topics.
• GovQA: Allocate the financial payments and fees the City receives from the new online records request system.

Accepting the reduction would allow these initiatives to continue and allow Business Operations capacity to work on new initiatives depending on their scope and requirements."																												Y			INCLUDE	08	REDUCTION											
MF_10	CAO's Office-Reallocate Spectator staff costs													CAO's Office				N	"This decision package will reallocate personnel costs for the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager position from 85% Spectator Venues & Visitor Activities Fund (SVVAF) and 15% CAO's Office General Fund (GF) to 100% SVVAF.  This cut is being proposed to better align funding sources with functional activities within the Spectator Program and will result in a $25,156 reduction in GF in the CAO's Office budget.  Staff will be fully funded through the SVVAF.

Beginning in FY 2014-15, fifteen percent of the personnel costs associated with the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager positon were allocated to the CAO's Office.  This reflected the work assignments for the position, which included development of the Civic Assets chapter of the Comprehensive Plan's Citywide Systems Plan.  This effort involved coordination and collaboration with a variety of City bureaus.  The Comp Plan update is nearing completion and the work being done on that effort by the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager is principally complete.  Continuing involvement with Comp Plan implementation and Citywide planning and development activities are being assumed by the Sr. Policy Analyst. 

Beginning in FY 2015-16, the work being performed by the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager is shifting to focus exclusively on Spectator Program related matters.  As part of the FY 2015-16 Budget adoption process, the CBO updated the City's Fund Statements.  This included fairly significant revisions to the Spectator Facilities Operating Fund to: 1) change the Fund's name, 2) clarify the Council's intent for revenues and expenses within the SVVAF, and 3) clarify the program activities to include administrative oversight for the Portland'5 Centers for the Arts and liaison activities with a variety of travel, tourism, and sports related organizations.

The proposed cut package will move the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager position 100% to the SVVAF resulting in savings of $25,156 to the CAO's Office budget, which will be used to help meet the OMF General Fund cut target."	"This cut will better align funding sources with current work activities.  The Spectator Facilities and Development Manager position will be fully funded by the SVVAF and no service impact will occur in the Spectator Program.

If the GF sources were retained to fund 15% of the Spectator Facilities and Development Manager position, work performed by that position could continue to include other cross-bureau/Citywide efforts performed by other members of the Policy Team such as business process development and administrative policy updates, where the incumbent's experience with various City bureaus and knowledge of City programs and activities has proved valuable in the past.  However, the work program for the Spectator Program will benefit from this focus.  If the General Fund resources remained available to the Policy Team, they could be dedicated to efforts such as the Improved Council Documents project or other projects that could benefit multiple bureaus, allowing these to be completed in a more timely fashion.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	07	REDUCTION											
MF_100	Decision Package																	N																														Y			INCLUDE													
MF_101	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_102	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_103	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_104	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_105	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_106	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_107	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_108	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_109	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_11	BHR-Program Spec for Model Employer Resolution													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	In May 2012, Council adopted Resolution #36925, affirming the City's commitment to becoming a model employer of persons with disabilities.  A model employer is one who demonstrates a strong commitment in the employment, promotion and equitable treatment of persons with disabilities.  The Portland Commission on Disabilities drafted the proposal for turning the City into a model employer. Although adopted by Council, there was no funding associated with the resolution.  The Bureau of Human Resources (BHR) has primary responsibility for its implementation, but budget reductions in outreach and recruitment staff have limited the bureau's ability to implement this important resolution.  To date, using a staff person "borrowed" from the Office of Equity and Human Rights, BHR has a draft model employer strategy and the beginnings of a work plan.  BHR also sent out its first survey of employees to obtain baseline information about how employees with disabilities perceive their treatment from the city.  This work has fallen to the HR Director, working with a sub-committee of the Portland Commission on Disabilities, and is not sustainable if the City is indeed going to become a model employer.  The addition of a program specialist position whose primary responsibility will be to implement and maintain this program is critical if the City is going to live up to the ideals expressed in the resolution.  The City has work to do around outreach to persons with disabilities for employment, educating our bureaus around hiring individuals with a disability, retention of those employees who have a disability, and creating trainings and programs to ensure our work environment is appropriate and welcoming to those who have a disability whether they are our employees or our customers.  BHR is requesting ongoing funding, but one-time money for one year to accomplish some of the listed tasks would at least continue the work we have done to date and enhance our outreach efforts.  This budget request is supported by the Portland Commission on Disabilities and members would be happy to testify in its favor before Council to stress the importance of funding the initiative.	This decision package would add a position to implement and maintain the Model Employer for Persons with a Disability initiative and ensure that the City meets its commitments under the Council-adopted resolution.  Individuals with disabilities are underrepresented in our workforce.  In addition, these individuals represent an untapped resource for the City and may be critical as we address staffing shortages caused by large numbers of retirements.  The position meets the goal under the OMF Strategic Plan to provide equitable access to City services and opportunities.  It also promotes equity and opportunities for all Portlanders.  If the position is not funded, implementation of the Model Employer resolution will take longer and is unlikely to be as robust as it would be with dedicated staff.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
MF_110	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_111	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_112	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_113	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_114	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_115	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_116	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_117	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_118	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_119	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_12	BHR-OSS III Realignment of Front Desk Support													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	This decision package will allocate a share of the cost of the Office Support Specialist III reception position in the Bureau of Human Resources (BHR) to the Bureau of Technology Services (BTS), freeing up $28,536 in General Fund resources to contribute towards the BHR General Fund cut target.  BHR will enter into an annual service level agreement with BTS for this cost allocation.  BHR previously entered into an agreement with BTS to provide front desk support for the entire 4th floor with BTS covering half the cost of the BHR reception remodel.  It was anticipated that this agreement would be in place until the Portland Building restack was completed.  Since the restack never happened, BHR now requests that BTS pay a portion of front desk reception costs until the Portland Building is reconstructed.	BHR does not anticipate a material impact until the bureau is relocated as part of the Portland Building Reconstruction project.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	REDUCTION											
MF_120	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_121	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_122	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_123	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_124	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_125	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_126	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_127	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_128	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_129	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_13	BHR-EBS IA Increase for Training													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	"This decision package will increase the interagency between BHR and EBS to reflect the realignment of services provided by the Training and Workforce Development Program.  

It will also increase SAP instructional design and training delivery services through the following methods:
a) Analyze training needs by consulting with subject matter experts, including business process owners, business analysts, and SAP end-users, to determine requirements for new training programs; assess effectiveness of current training materials to identify requirements or needs for improvements.
b) Develop and/or revise training materials and programs for existing and newly-implemented SAP modules and related business processes.  Materials may include user guides, eLearning, work instructions, videos, and other ancillary items.
c) Identify, facilitate, and coach instructors for SAP training.

This decision package will also provide for administration and support of the Learning Management System (LMS) through the following methods:
a) Provide instructor-led training sessions as needed; schedule courses, including sourcing instructors, training rooms, and training materials; manage course enrollment, attendance, and reporting; monitor training effectiveness with evaluations.
b) Maintain SAP training curriculum and catalog.
c) Ensure compliance with identified training requirements for end-users, based on assigned SAP role."	This decision package will shift the focus of training staff time from Citywide training to SAP training, decreasing Citywide training and increasing SAP training.  It will improve SAP end-user productivity and performance by providing targeted skills-based training in a timely manner which should decrease error-rates and increase knowledge of SAP systems and applications.  This package fits within the OMF Strategic Plan Strategic Theme of Workforce Development/Employer of Choice by providing improved SAP training opportunities for City employees.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
MF_130	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_131	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_132	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_133	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_134	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_135	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_136	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_137	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_138	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_139	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_14	BHR-FMLA Program Coordinator Realignment													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	This decision package will reallocate personnel costs for the FMLA Program Coordinator from 100% General Fund to 100% Health Fund and change the position’s reporting structure to the Health and Financial Benefits Team.  Services provided by the FMLA Program Coordinator include FMLA Citywide coordination, resolution of FMLA issues for bureau-level FMLA coordinators, training for bureau-level coordinators and managers, Catastrophic Leave coordination, injured employee return to work program administration, and other duties as assigned.  All current services will move with the position to the Health & Financial Benefits Team. Other local governments place FMLA coordination in a variety of places within their organization, although it is often found in the Benefits or Benefits/Risk Management Units.	The organizational change will create more support for this position’s activities as part of a larger group and it allows for cross training and growth of the individual in the position and others currently on the Health and Financial Benefits Team. This organizational change will also result in increased efficiencies and effectiveness within the Bureau of Human Resources and allow the City to continue to meet all the regulations surrounding FMLA.																												Y			INCLUDE	11	REDUCTION											
MF_140	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_141	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_142	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_15	BHR-Employee Training Fund													Bureau of Human Resources-Training Fund				N	This decision package would fund a program for educational assistance and professional development to reimburse City employees for academic program coursework and professional development training opportunities ($200,000) and the administration of the program ($50,000). The City of Portland, as part of its Employer of Choice strategy and under OMF's Strategic Theme of Workforce Development/Employer of Choice in the OMF 2012-17 Strategic Plan, supports the development of its workforce and encourages employees to pursue training and formal education to enhance their knowledge and skills.  A program for tuition reimbursement and educational assistance is the most frequently cited request by City employees as a desired program to support their learning, development, and career growth. While some represented employees have access to a professional development fund similar to this proposal, the majority of City employees do not receive this opportunity. This program would be open to all City employees, subject to annual maximum reimbursements ($1,500 per employee).  The program would operate as a qualified plan under Internal Revenue Code Section 127 which allows employers to exclude certain reimbursements for educational assistance from employees' gross income.  This package includes funding for administration needed to support this program.  However, if the Training Analyst add package is approved this request could be reduced to $200,000 assuming that the Training Analyst could assume this additional workload.	"The City would establish an educational assistance program to help pay for the following types of training and education for its employees which are not otherwise funded by the employee's bureau or another program:
• Tuition expenses incurred through study at approved institutions of learning that 1) lead to an undergraduate or graduate degree related to the employee’s current position or other City position; or 2) are for classes that are directly related to the employee’s position at the City.
• Fees for professional development, including seminars, training, workshops, and study toward a certification or continuing education requirement directly related to the employee’s position at the City."																												Y			INCLUDE	11	ADDS											
MF_16	BHR-Training & Development Analyst													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	"This decision package would convert the one-time carryover funding that was approved in FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16 for a limited-term position in Training and Workforce Development into ongoing funding for the position.  Currently, the Training and Workforce Development Manager and the BHR HR Business Partners are primarily responsible for training all City employees in Council mandated trainings, such as HRAR 2.02, Cultural Competency, Bias Awareness, Child Abuse Reporting, and Manager and Supervisory training. 

With an increasingly competitive environment for attracting and retaining top talent and the City's likely loss to retirement of over one-third of its workforce over the next three to five years, the City must implement programs that show we value our most important infrastructure--our employees.  In FY 2014-15 and 2015-16, Council approved one-time funding for a limited term position in BHR's Training and Workforce Development Program to develop a City-wide onboarding program.  The impetus for this approval was the recognized need for such a program to market the City as an employer of choice and to provide comprehensive orientation to new employees which assists with retention.  In 2014, Moss Adams recommended developing a Citywide training program, including coordination of training with other City bureaus.  The research shows that following salary and benefits, opportunity for job growth, professional development and employee engagement are the most important factors in attracting and retaining qualified employees.  This is particularly true for the younger generations coming into the workforce.  To be competitive the City needs to continue to develop the SAP Learning Solution, including the learning management system.  New trainings need to be developed using learning formats outside of traditional classroom settings, such as E-learning.  Currently the Training and Workforce Development Manager and the BHR HR Business Partners are primarily responsible for training all city employees in Council mandated trainings, such as HRAR 2.01, Cultural Competency, Bias Awareness, Child Abuse Reporting, and Manager and Supervisory training.  The Training and Workforce Development Manager is charged with revising and developing new training, but given the current workload there is little capacity to develop and roll out additional trainings and programs outside of those that are Council mandated, as well as coordinate training Citywide. 

Ongoing funding for the Training Analyst position will provide much-needed capacity to manage the Citywide onboarding program and update the program on a regular basis so it remains relevant and to assist in the development and roll out of much needed training for supervisors around leadership and other core competencies, succession planning and employee development (mentoring, coaching, communication, and performance management) to name a few.  A robust training program is key for the city to become an employer of choice so we can continue to attract and retain a diverse, culturally competent, fully engaged workforce that provides excellent public service.  This request also aligns with OMF's Strategic Theme of Workforce Development/Employer of Choice in the OMF 2012-17 Strategic Plan."	The Training and Workforce Development Program is currently at full capacity.  Without the ongoing addition of this position, it will be difficult to provide mandated trainings, maintain the Citywide onboarding program, and develop new trainings.  Those bureaus with adequate funds will be able to pay for professional development for employees but those with tight budgets will have to do without, impacting the morale of the workforce and leading to retention issues.  As noted above, an engaged and qualified workforce is critical to accomplishing all of the Mayor's objectives but specifically the additional position will assist in developing and rolling out training and professional development that is key to the City reaching out and attracting a more diverse workforce.  In FY 2015-16, BHR and EBS merged some components of the EBS training program with the BHR program to address span of control issues as well as a step towards creating a central program, but the addition of one EBS position to Training and Workforce Development does not add enough capacity or expertise to accomplish all of the tasks described above as the work is dedicated to training development and delivery specifically geared towards EBS and SAP end users.  Addition of a position in Training and Workforce Development is a key towards the City becoming an employer of choice and meets every strategic theme in the OMF 2012-2017 strategic plan. Improved training improves customer service, adds to operational excellence, is financially sustainable by providing more services "in-house'' and is key to workforce development.  A robust training program is also an asset in attracting and retaining a more diverse workforce, increasing economic opportunities for more Portlanders.   Finally, this add package would also mitigate service reductions to Citywide training caused by the cut package that shifts resources to provide more services to Training in support of EBS.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	ADDS											
MF_17	BHR-OSS III Diversity Outreach & Employment													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	"This decision package would eliminate the currently vacant Office Support Specialist III (OSSIII) position within the Diversity, Outreach, and Employment Resources (DOER) program.  This position provides administrative support for the Senior Human Resources Analysts to assist with the completion of forms, processes, and procedures as well as recruitment and community outreach.  

The OSSIII position in position in Diversity, Outreach and Employment Resources has the following responsibilities:
•	Processing all referrals/certifications, to include new referrals as well as returned
•	Generate all eligible lists, surveys, and send notifications for both passes and fails
•	Process all existing list requests
•	Lead archivist for the DOER program
•	Prepare and distribute City-Wide weekly job opening emails
•	Scan and upload all testing answer/score sheets
•	Maintain active eligible list database which is updated monthly
•	Research and produce special reports
•	Generate print orders and proofing the returning printing
•	Schedule tests and meeting rooms
•	Community outreach

"	"BHR has experienced an increase in recruitment requests and number of hires made by the bureaus.  Because the OSSIII position is currently vacant, the workload mentioned above has been performed by a Senior Administrative Specialist (SAS), who would otherwise be performing higher level administrative work.  The SAS has processed over 700 referral/certifications in addition to continuing administrative work in support of recruitments.  Because the SAS is currently covering the vacant OSSIII’s responsibilities, Senior HR Analysts are having to take on administrative work such as placing recruitment ads, processing requisitions, training citizens on how to apply for City jobs, training bureau managers in NEOGOV functionality, etc.

If the cut package is not accepted and the OSSIII position is filled, the SAS will be able to fully concentrate on higher-level tasks.  This will also allow the Senior HR Analysts to focus on announcement development, outreach, and partnering with their assigned bureaus to facilitate in bureau-specific recruitment and outreach efforts to attract diverse and non-traditional applicants.  One of the Strategic Themes in the OMF Strategic Plan is Workforce Development/Employer of Choice.  The recruitment process facilitates the entry of a qualified and diverse candidate pool into the City and the inability to move top candidates through the process in a timely fashion could result in them going to work elsewhere.

Maintaining service levels for recruitment is very important for BHR and its customers and retaining this position in order to facilitate the recruitment process (e.g., not taking this cut) is a high priority.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	20	REDUCTION											
MF_18	BHR-OSS III Payroll													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	This decision package would eliminate a currently vacant Office Support Specialist III (OSSIII) position within the Human Resources Systems and Payroll Administration program.  This position is primarily responsible for third party vendor reconciliation, the City’s TRIP Program, and garnishment administration.  Third party vendor reconciliation is the process by which the City pays different vendors required funds that are withheld from employee pay, by either court orders or other direction.  The City’s TRIP Program incentivizes employee use of alternative modes of transportation to driving, such as mass transit, biking, walking, and carpooling.  Garnishments are court orders and/or tax levies to withhold a judgement from an employee’s paycheck.	"As noted above, this position is currently vacant.  BHR is already experiencing a slowdown in the timing of the work that has to be done to keep the City legally compliant with the required timing of the payroll process.  With existing staff absorbing the OSSIII workload, other tasks completed in support of the payroll process are also taking longer and could potentially cause non-compliance with federal and state regulations.  The bureau does not feel comfortable moving forward with hiring for the position until it is determined whether this cut will be taken by Council.  

Regarding the specific work impacts:
•	Eliminating this position will cause a delay in transmitting third party vendor reconciliation information to the Accounting Division.  There will also be a delay in getting checks printed at the Auditor’s Office which will, in turn, delay payments expected by the vendors.  
•	BHR Payroll is already a week behind in the input processing of garnishments received by the City due to the current vacancy.  While the City is still adhering to the legal requirements, the risk of noncompliance, will increase in the event of a significant workload increase.
•	Other job responsibilities like processing union dues payments and front desk coverage, will also have to be absorbed by existing staff.
•	Because of workload constraints, without this position BHR may need to discuss transferring the administration of the City’s TRIP Program to PBOT.

While this cut package will not directly impact any of the Bureau's performance measures, it will pose challenges to the team to keep up with workload and could impact their ability to provide Quality Customer Service, an OMF Strategic Theme in the FY 2012-2017 Strategic Plan.  Maintaining service levels for payroll is very important for BHR and its customers and retaining this position in order to process payroll in a timely and accurate manner (e.g., not taking this cut) is a high priority.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	19	REDUCTION											
MF_19	BHR-Reduce Training & Professional Serv Funding													Bureau of Human Resources-General Fund				N	This decision package will reduce materials and services across Training and Workforce Development; Diversity, Outreach, and Employment Resources; and Operations.  This funding would otherwise be used for items such as instruction materials for trainings, external professional services needed to address specific issues, special projects work, and civil service board costs.	"This proposed reduction, along with previous reductions in prior years, will significantly limit instruction materials for training and external professional services needed to address specific issues, special projects, and civil service board costs.  Previous year reductions along with internal realignments to fund new programs such as the CityWide Training program have already hampered available resources within BHR.  This level of reduction would bring down the total amount of external materials service resources below a long-term sustainable level for the bureau.  

The proposed reduction in materials and services will impact the level of service provided to City bureaus.  Funding would be reduced for items such as advertising and recruitments.  Taking this reduction package would not allow the bureau to do outreach for 10-15 job fairs, as well as outreach to support the City’s policy to increase diversity.  This decision package would prohibit BHR from continuing to develop much-needed refresher material for the City’s Cultural Competency training to include discussion of equitable outcomes and removal of systematic bias.  These are important goals in the City’s overarching equity initiatives.  In addition, this reduction package would limit BHR’s ability to develop Emotional Intelligence training materials for City employees.  This type of training is the most requested by City bureaus."																												Y			INCLUDE	18	REDUCTION											
MF_20	PSSRP - Reduction in Personal Services													Citywide Projects PSSRP				N	"This decision package eliminates an Information Systems Analyst, Principal-Gen (PISA) position and a Technology Capital Project Manager II position in the Public Safety System Revitalization Program (PSSRP). The PISA position has been under-filled and as the PSSRP projects are successfully completed, the need for the services are not as critical as in year's past. The remaining administrative work will be absorbed by other areas of OMF. The responsibility of the Technology Capital Project Manager II position was to manage the program. The BTS Director position has absorbed these duties. The managerial oversight of the PSSRP will continue to be performed by the BTS Director through the end of the PSSRP projects.
"	As PSSRP projects are successfully completed, the need for the level of personal services is not as critical as in year's past. Currently, PSSRP has one active project in its portfolio. The elimination of these positions should have little impact on the ability for PSSRP to successfully complete the Radio Replacement Project. Any administrative services needed by PSSRP through the end of the Radio Replacement Project will be absorbed by other areas of the Office of Management and Finance.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
MF_21	BRFS - Grants - Reduce Grants Training													Grants Management				N	"This decision package would eliminate trainings previously sponsored by Grants Management to provide updated federal, state, and local guidelines and requirements for City bureaus and other regional grant recipients. It also severely curtails funding available for Grants Management staff to attend workshops to keep informed on the latest policies and requirements, impacting their ability to provide expertise and solutions to bureaus on management of their grants. Grants Management provides services to all City bureaus receiving grants. As part of this service, the team sponsors grant management trainings for City bureaus and other governmental agencies in the Portland Metro region. These trainings provide updated federal, state, and local guidelines and requirements for bureaus and agencies that receive grants for program activities. The reduction package includes eliminating the trainings for City and regional grant recipients. 

Grants Management staff provide expertise and solutions to other bureaus on management of their grants. Grants Management staff tracks 128 grants in eleven bureaus that total $36,495,749 from federal, state and local sources. Staff requires travel to attend workshops to keep informed on the latest policies and requirements on grant management. The reduction package requires staff to prioritize educational opportunities. 

The reduction package includes a cut to miscellaneous expenses and requires staff to prioritize expenditures for activities to meet the cut target with the least impact on business operations."	An elimination of the trainings provided by Grants Management will reduce the service level staff provides to its customers who benefit from the updated knowledge on grant requirements and policies. This knowledge ensures bureaus receiving grants are in compliance with ongoing changes to federal, state, and local regulations.  Reduction or elimation in trainings may increase findings in annual audits resulting in the City becoming a high risk organization potentially reducing future grant funding.																												Y			INCLUDE	16	REDUCTION											
MF_22	BRFS - Procurement - Reduce Software Replacement													Procurement				N	This decision package reduces Procurement’s ongoing investment in software replacement and upgrade funding.  Procurement owns several key pieces of software related to vendor registration, bidding, and compliance tracking. Procurement established a software replacement fund with BTS in order to ensure funding is available for future upgrade or replacement.  Procurement manages approximately 11,000 vendor records in their solicitation software with the number of projects varying at any given time. To manage contractor compliance, Procurement Services is in the process of implementing a new compliance software system. To comply with the FY 2016-17 budget direction for General Fund groups to submit 5% reductions, the division will make cuts to its Internal Materials & Services account for BTS Operations and Strategic Billable charges of $120,000 and External Materials & Services account of $3,216. The reduction may delay replacing current software or future upgrades.	This reduction follows a large multi-phase technology upgrade project and, although some system work may still be needed, this cut should have a relatively minor impact on the organization. There will still be $57,000 in our technology billable and strategic account to take care of any minor fixes the Division might need. However, this reduction could lead to add packages in the future when upgrades or replacement become necessary.																												Y			INCLUDE	15	REDUCTION											
MF_23	BRFS - Procurement - Reduct to PCDP and MEP Prog													Procurement				N	"This decision package will eliminate participation in the Mentor Protégé program sponsored by the Port of Portland, reduce support for the Prime Contractor Development Program, eliminate the Prime Contractor Residential Housing start-up program in conjunction with Portland Housing Bureau, and reduce sponsorships as part of the We are Better Together program.  Procurement Services is a division of the Bureau of Revenue and Financial Services.  In FY 2016-17, to comply with the budget instruction for General Fund groups to submit 5% reductions,  the division will make cuts to its External Materials and Services of $149,000. 

Included in these reductions are the following line item cuts that may impact programs. 1) Eliminate participation in a Mentor Protégé program sponsored by the Port of Portland ($30,000), 2) Reduction of professional services expenditures related to the Prime Contractor Development Program ($50,000), and 3) Eliminate the Prime Contractor Residential Housing start-up program in conjunction with Portland Housing Bureau ($30,000) and, 4) Reduction of Sponsorships as part of the We are Better Together program ($42,000)."	The Mentor Protégé program and Prime Contractor Development Programs have changed focus so a reduction in this area is somewhat mitigated by other efforts within Procurement Services.  This reduction will affect the funds allocated for City sponsorships at community events that go to support small businesses, communities of color and displaced individuals and businesses.																												Y			INCLUDE	14	REDUCTION											
MF_24	BRFS - Acct - Reduce CAFR Efficiency Initiatives													Accounting				N	This decision package reduces Accounting’s budget for temporary employees and overtime in personnel services and for professional services and miscellaneous in external materials and services. The division’s budget appropriation for personnel services will be reduced by $55,000 and external materials and services will be reduced by $91,760 in order to meet the required 5% General Fund cut target. The reduction in personal services reduces the Division's ability to utilize temporary employees during the busy time, and also reduces the overtime budget.  These cuts reduce the flexibility to manage the staffing resources according to the workload demands of the busy CAFR preparation/audit season.  The reduction in external materials and services is primarily comprised of a reduction to the professional services/consulting line item.  The budget in this line item was planned to be used for requirements gathering and blueprinting of the CAFR preparation process, and to determine the availability of a more efficient software than what is currently being used.  As noted above, acceleration of the CAFR reporting process is being highly encouraged on a national level by the government financial community.  We are striving to get ahead of this potential mandate by implementing all efficiencies in technology that we possibly can.  This cut will delay this initiative.  We are proposing to fund the bulk of this cut via external materials and services in order to avoid eliminating any full-time employees.	"These reductions limit the Division’s ability to implement any new CAFR efficiency software or process improvement initiatives that require external investment. Timelier financial reporting by municipal governments is being strongly encouraged by the municipal finance community, and is also supported by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA). The cut in personnel services reduces the Division’s flexibility to hire temporary employees and meet overtime demands associated with accelerating the completion of the annual CAFR and audit.

The ""Number of days CAFR is completed after fiscal year end"" is a performance measure of the Accounting Division.  The division is striving to be an industry leader by publishing the CAFR in less time. The goal date for completing the CAFR for FY 2016-17 is 135 days after year-end, with the following year's goal being 120 days after year-end.  This is in response to the need for more timely financial information from bond rating agencies and other users of the information. If this decision package is approved, this performance measure goal will return to the previous year's performance measure of CAFR completion in 150 days after year-end. 

Further, the municipal bond market has been stressing the need for more timely financial information in order to better assess a government's financial position.  If a mandate for quicker CAFR preparation is put in place and the City cannot respond accordingly, the City's excellent AAA bond rating could be jeopardized. 

The primary area in which to gain efficiency in reporting acceleration is by the optimal use of technology.  The technology software industry is rapidly changing and it is urgent that we keep abreast of the latest solutions.  The Division planned to hire a consultant to assist with research in this highly important and technical area. By cutting the professional services/consulting line item budget, technology solutions will not be optimized.  
"																												Y			INCLUDE	17	REDUCTION											
MF_25	BRFS - Acct - Target True-up for EBS Costs													Accounting				N	This package reduces the Division's general fund target by $17,497 to re-align EBS budgets within the Bureau of Revenue and Financial Services (BRFS).  Following the initial creation of BRFS, EBS charges for both Debt Management and Treasury were historically allocated and budgeted within the Accounting division.  Beginning in FY 2016-17, these EBS costs will be removed from Accounting's budget and charged to the Debt Management and Treasury.  This package will reduce the Accounting division's general fund target accordingly.	The reduction in general fund target for EBS re-alignment will have a net zero impact on the Accounting division's budget, as both expenses (EBS costs) and revenue will be reduced by $17,497 and these costs have been built in to the base budgets for Debt Management and Treasury.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
MF_26	BRFS Reorganization - Debt and Treasury													Debt and Treasury				N	"In 2016, the Public Finance & Treasury Division is being separated into two divisions: the Treasury Division and the Debt Management Division.  This decision package realigns the cost of the City Treasurer position, and associated materials and services, to be fully funded from the Treasury Division.  Previously, these costs were shared equally between Treasury and Debt Management.

The Treasury Division is predominantly funded by investment earnings from the portfolio they manage.  Debt Management is funded by interagency agreements (and one intergovernmental agreement) with the customers who use their services.  While this package has a net zero impact on the City budget overall, it does shift $118,521 from interagency/intergovernmental funding to interest earnings.  
"	This package is a net zero realignment of $118,521 from interagency/intergovernmental funding to interest earnings.  Under the new structure, the Treasurer will retain responsibility for all day-to-day treasury and investment functions and will continue focusing on PCI compliance, support of the City’s Socially Responsible Investment Committee, development of policies and practices around cash handling and payment processing efficiencies, and continued focus on policies/practices affecting the City’s PERS liability.  The Debt Manager will focus on supporting and facilitating the short and long-term financing needs of City bureaus, assuring IRS rebate and ongoing disclosure compliance for the City’s outstanding debt, and assisting in the development of financing plans and options for the City’s infrastructure and development programs.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
MF_27	BIBS Admin - Staff to the ECPC													BIBS				N	"The Equitable Contracting and Purchasing Commission (ECPC) was established by Ordinance #187030 to focus on increasing use of minorities and women-owned businesses in City contracting, and increasing inclusion of minorities and women in the workforce on City funded projects. Staff support performs professional level administrative support and works with the ECPC Chair, Procurement Services Division, City bureaus, and external agencies in project-based work. 

This package requests General Fund discretionary funding, in the form of a cash transfer to BIBS Adminstration, for a half-time Community Service Aide (CSA) position to provide this staff support.  The position is currently funded one-time within BIBS and this decision package would make funding ongoing through the General Fund.  The General Fund is a more appropriate funding source for this work.			
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
"	The CSA will support the goals, expectations, and mission of the Equitable Contracting and Purchasing Commission and performs duties accordingly. The CSA will perform professional-level administrative support and works with the ECPC Chair, Procurement Division, City bureaus, and external agencies in project-based work as requested. The position will provide technical administrative support to ECPC which requires exercise of independent judgment and initiative. Provision of administrative support includes, but is not limited to: coordinates office management activities for the commission, assists internal and external customers, resolves issues, prepares research data, schedules meetings, maintains the ECPC's calendar, coordinates meetings and agendas, and types and/or composes letters.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	ADDS											
MF_28	BRFS - Treasury - Soc Responsible Inv Research													Treasury				N	"In December 2014, Council approved Resolution #37102 to form a permanent Socially Responsible Investments Committee of community members to recommend corporate debt issuers for inclusion on, or removal from, the City's Corporate Securities Do-Not-Buy List.  In the Resolution, “The City Treasurer is directed to identify and procure a research subscription(s) that best addresses the socially responsible investment principles established by City Council…” so that the Committee can form its recommendations to Council.  This decision package requests funds to pay for an ongoing subscription to this research.  

In order to make recommendations to Council, the Committee needs to consult research about social- and values-based investing, including composite scoring that weighs the relative importance of individual issues and criteria for the corporate debt issuers eligible for the City's direct investment.  This decision package will fund the ongoing subscription costs of this research, and will support the Mayor's priority of equity and opportunity."	Approval of this decision package will allow the City's new Socially Responsible Investments Committee to have specialized investment research on which to base its recommendations.  Approval of this decision package will provide Treasury with ongoing funding necessary for this annual research subscription and allow it to continue to provide banking services at current service levels.  Since Treasury is funded with investment earnings, this package will decrease the net investment earnings distributed to City funds.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
MF_29	BRFS - Rev - Utility Franchise/Wireless Support													Revenue				N	"Office for Community Technology (OCT) of the Revenue Division maintains over 50 utility franchise agreements. Utility franchise agreements can often take six months or more to negotiate. This decision package will eliminate external resources to assist in addressing the ten backlogged utility franchise negotiations (as of 12/16/2015) and in implementing potential new FCC rules affecting local permitting procedures and policies on wireless siting by commercial wireless carriers.

In FY 2014-15, approximately $56 million was collected from these franchise agreements.  Of the FY 2014-15 total collection, approximately $1.8 million was collected from the ten companies with backlogged franchise negotiations.  If this cut is taken, OCT will be delayed in updating the backlog of utility franchises with antiquated, narrow definitions of gross revenue resulting in a lower base on which the tax is computed.  Furthermore OCT negotiates fiber and conduit assets for IRNE as part of the franchise program.  Updating the franchises may result in additional conduit and fiber assets for IRNE.  Because of other workload, OCT staff relies on external resources to assist with renegotiations.  This package reduces funding for Professional Services by $17,181, the TelecommUnity subscription by $2,500, and Travel by $1,500.  This is a substantial portion of external resources available for franchise renewal assistance."	Potential impacts include lost General Fund revenue from an outdated utility franchise tax base, conduit and fiber assets for IRNE not being realized, and potential legal risk as local wireless rules may not be consistent with new federal rules.  If this cut is taken, the ability to advocate and protect authority to collect franchise fees, manage the right of way, and maintain local zoning authority for wireless will be reduced.  These efforts support the Portland Plan (# 59 and #105) and are also listed in the draft Comprehensive Plan.																												Y			INCLUDE	13	REDUCTION											
MF_30	BRFS - Rev - Portland Community Media													Revenue				N	"There is a $865,957 grant between the City of Portland and Portland Community Media (PCM) to provide financial and technology resources dedicated for public, educational, and government uses by access providers as designated by the City.  This decision package reduces the grant by approximately 5%, which will cut 0.7 FTE in PCM.  PCM implements Digital Inclusion strategies from the City's Broadband Strategic Plan, Portland Plan (#61) and draft Comprehensive Plan.  The cut will eliminate PCM's staff capacity to address digital inclusion. 

PCM provides digital literacy training and access to computers and the internet for at risk and disadvantaged populations within the Portland region. PCM works with culturally-specific/responsive organizations to structure training that meets these populations' needs. This might include, among other considerations, language specific translation, holding trainings at organization sites, and culturally relevant content.  This reduction package will result in a reduction in services to these underserved populations.

PCM connects people to media technologies and ensures equitable access for communities to share their stories, viewpoints and culture for the purpose of promoting broad participation in our civic and cultural life. PCM achieves equity and inclusion goals by developing partnerships with non-profits who serve those members of society who have been, and continue to be, underserved and underrepresented. Through these partnerships PCM builds a strong mission aligned network working toward city-wide goals of inclusion. 

The reduction eliminates 0.7 FTE position in PCM focused on establishing the partnerships foundational to the digital inclusion work. PCM will not be able to build partnerships with non-profits in order to deliver digital literacy training and provide internet access to these underserved communities. The workload associated with this staff position includes outreach to non-profits, determining resources, establishing the scope of the shared project based on the needs of the participants (which may include culturally specific education and language translation), and ongoing assessment of impact and ongoing support to the underserved community.
"	"PCM implements Digital Inclusion strategies from the City's Broadband Strategic Plan, Portland Plan (#61) and draft Comprehensive Plan.  PCM's digital literacy training programs and inclusion strategies have expanded and gained momentum. The cut will eliminate PCM's staff capacity to address digital inclusion.

Specifically, PCM will not be able to fulfill its short-term goals of partnering with eight community organizations — to serve an estimated 130 youth and adults — with targeted digital literacy training and support to enable their effective use of computers / Internet / multimedia tools for essential functions, such as accessing health information, applying for jobs, conducting research for school projects, and learning more about / participating in civic affairs. The eight community organization partnerships that would end include seven current partnerships with groups serving the homeless, LGBT, low income Spanish speakers, and disadvantaged youth.  

In addition to eliminating services to approximately 130 youth and adults next year, there is a ripple effect for our partner organizations. For example, PCM has been providing Internet Essentials training in partnership with Hacienda CDC and Voz, enabling day laborers and their families, and other low income Latinos, to learn digital literacy skills and access education, job information, immigration information, and opportunities to participate in cultural and civic affairs. These non-profits will no longer be able to offer their clients the digital literacy training and support that PCM currently provides.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	12	REDUCTION											
MF_31	BRFS - Rev - Support Revenue Collection													Revenue				N	"This decision package requests 1 additional FTE for the Unregistered Compliance Team (UCT), 1 FTE for regulating and taxing short term rental activities, and 1 FTE for a Limited Term Revenue Auditor dedicated to auditing the Franchise Management and Utility License Programs.  

A)  This request adds 1.0 FTE RTS III position for the Unregistered Compliance Team (UCT).  The position would be responsible for obtaining business license tax compliance from unregistered businesses which cannot be pursued due to current staffing levels.

The primary focus of the UCT is to find businesses that appear to be subject to the City/County business income tax, but that are not registered with the Revenue Division.  To identify potential unregistered businesses, UCT researches “leads” generated by data matches (dataset comparisons) with other governmental agencies.  Data matches lead to a list of potential unregistered businesses that then need research and follow-up to verify compliance.  UCT works with these prospective taxpayers until they are registered or determined not to be subject to tax.  There are currently five FTE authorized on the team (including one FTE temporarily assigned to short-term rental enforcement).

The Division consistently has thousands more businesses to investigate than it has resources to dedicate to doing so.  Data matching and UCT follow-up is a proven, successful strategy used by the Division to increase taxpayer compliance and has resulted in $15 million in additional City General Fund revenues (over $24 million including Multnomah County collections) over the past 10 years.  Without additional staff focused on these leads, the City and County forego revenue that is otherwise due them.  Adding this position to the UCT team is expected to favorably impact (by reducing) the Business License Tax Gap, one of the City's key performance measures.

The Revenue Division currently has nearly 3,000 leads that it does not have the staff available to follow up on.  If not pursued, there is a strong likelihood that the revenues will never be collected.  As time lapses, it is difficult and often impossible to collect on old receivables as taxpayers go out of business, etc.

B)  This request adds 1.0 FTE RTS IV position for regulating and taxing short term rental activities.  On January 21, 2015, City Council approved Ordinance #186985, which clarified and expanded Revenue Division authority to regulate and tax short term rental activities conducted through booking agent websites such as Airbnb.com and HomeAway.com. The ordinance findings included the Division’s intent to request an additional 1.0 FTE for enforcement activities related to the thousands of hosts operating illegally in Portland.  The Division first requested this additional position in the FY 2015-16 Fall BMP, but the City Budget Office recommended deferral to the FY 2016-17 budget development process to request on-going resources for this position.

There are currently 3,000 to 3,500 short term rental listings across websites such as Airbnb.com and HomeAway.com in violation of City Code and the Division lacks the staff resources necessary to identify and follow up with this many violations. Enforcement has generally taken a two-pronged approach; the Division is in various phases of enforcement both with booking agent websites and individual local “hosts” listing rentals on the websites.  Host enforcement is complicated by the fact that booking agent websites obscure identity and address information for host listings. Booking agent websites have thus far refused to divulge this information to the Division. Since February, the Division has mailed approximately 250 warning and violation notices to booking agent websites and their associated local hosts by reallocating resources from other tax collection units.  The Division is also engaged in enforcement directly with booking agent websites, including litigation.  Continued enforcement requires a dedicated, full-time employee (Revenue and Taxation Specialist IV).  Currently 1.0 FTE from the Division's UCT team has been temporarily pulled from their usual tasks to assist full-time on this project. An estimated $400,000 in UCT revenue will be lost if this request is not authorized by Council, per the discussion in the Fall BuMP.

The bulk of the activities associated with the position include identifying and notifying hosts of their obligations to collect and remit taxes, investigating booking agent websites for compliance issues, and working closely with the Bureau of Development Services to ensure fire/life/safety inspections occur. The position also provides ongoing customer service and education for hosts requesting assistance to come into compliance.







C)  This request continues one-time funding for 1.0 FTE Limited-Term Revenue Auditor position.  This request is for a second year of one-time funding for a Limited Term Revenue Auditor dedicated to perform audits annually for the Franchise Management and Utility License Programs, which generate over $82 million annually in General Fund revenue. The Auditor has already initiated 12 new audits since being hired in September to help address a backlog of audits.  These 12 companies pay the General Fund approximately $31 million annually, so even a minor audit adjustment for one of these companies will result in a substantial audit recovery for the City.  

The Franchise Management and Utility License Programs manage over 50 franchise agreements and over 100 licensees.  Because of staffing and retirements, very few audits were initiated between mid-2013 and the hiring of this Limited-Term Revenue Auditor in FY 2015-16.  Approximately 46 out of 50 franchisees and 150 utility licensees should be audited.  Franchisees have a restriction on the period for audits ranging from 2 to 5 years (depending on the agreement), and utility licensees have a 3 year restriction through City code.  The position will continue to perform audits in order to address the backlog before these limitations expire, and ensure ongoing compliance by franchisees and licensees going forward.  Assuming a successful net ROI on the position, the Division intends to request on-going funding for this position during the FY 2017-18 budget development process.
"	"This add package will result in increased revenue for the General Fund well in excess of its expense.  The UCT position will work to collect taxes owed from unregistered businesses and is expected to deliver a net positive return on investment for the General Fund of at least 2:1 (4:1 including Multnomah County).  The short term rental position will work to enforce regulations and tax compliance for thousands of local short term rental locations, in accordance with City Council Ordinance #186985 (passed in January of 2015).  Tax collections in FY 2014-15 from short term rentals exceeded $1.2 million and is expected to increase in FY 2015-16.  The Franchise Management and Utility License Programs generate over $82 million annually in General Fund revenue.  The Auditor position is expected to deliver a net positive return on investment for the General Fund.

Based on an audit conducted by outside consultants in 2010, at the request of the City Budget Office, it was confirmed that marginal Revenue and Tax Specialist positions in the Revenue Division create a net positive return on investment of at least 4:1; 2:1 for the City and 2:1 for Multnomah County.  Based on these findings and tax collection workload in excess of current staff capacity, we expect both the 1.0 FTE RTS III position for the Unregistered Compliance Team (UCT) and the 1.0 FTE RTS IV position for regulating and taxing short term rental activities will generate a net positive return on investment of at least 2:1 (4:1 including Multnomah County).  

Similarly, we expect the 1.0 FTE Limited-Term Revenue Auditor position will generate a positive net ROI for the General Fund.  Historically, audit recovery dollars have always exceeded cost as audits may impact both one-time and ongoing general revenues.  In addition, maintaining a schedule of regular audits is critical to ensuring that franchisees and licensees are adhering to the franchise and code terms.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
MF_32	BRFS - Rev - IRS Data Exchange													Revenue				N	"This decision package requests 2.0 FTE and related BTS costs associated with the IRS Data Exchange Program, allowing the Revenue Division to continue to receive federal taxpayer information (FTI).

The Revenue Division received an Innovation Fund grant in FY 2013-2014 to implement an agreement with the IRS Government Liaison Data Exchange Program (GLDEP) to receive FTI.  Much of that grant was carried over to FY 2014-2015.  In FY 2015-2016 when the grant was exhausted, the Division received one-time funding to continue implementation efforts.  In each fiscal year including the initial Innovation Fund request, Revenue signaled this program must receive ongoing funding to achieve ongoing return on investment.  This program allows the Revenue Division to receive FTI directly from the IRS to administer and collect tax revenues for the City and County.  This program is projected to increase compliance with all income tax programs and raise additional on-going General Fund business tax revenues from $780,000 to $2.3 million annually, in addition to additional revenues for Multnomah County and the Arts Education and Access Fund.  The Division is currently receiving FTI and has tentatively identified thousands of businesses that appear to be out of compliance with the City and County tax codes.  The Division will begin contacting these taxpayers in February to collect unpaid taxes.  
  
Because of the significant safeguarding and security procedures that must be performed by the Revenue Division to continue receiving FTI (detailed in IRS Pub 1075), the Division requires 1.0 FTE IRS Liaison and Disclosure Officer (Senior Management Analyst) to provide required training, auditing, compliance reporting, activity logging, monitoring, IT coordination, and interactions with the IRS Office of Safeguards and Office of Disclosures, and the IRS GLDEP Liaison to ensure that the City is meeting these security and safeguarding requirements.  Without this position, the Division will not be able to continue participating in this program, resulting in the loss of tax revenues and the opportunity to reduce the tax compliance burden on our taxpayers.

As the Division continues to implement the GLDEP in the current year, it has also become apparent that ongoing integration, security, and application development and maintenance workload requires 1.0 FTE Business Systems Analyst to ensure the program's success. 

1.0 FTE IRS Liaison and Disclosure Officer (Senior Management Analyst) position = $129,000
1.0 FTE Business Systems Analyst position = $122,000
External materials and supplies = $36,073
Internal materials and supplies = $8,300
BTS costs to maintain the FTI system = $148,927 
Mailings = $52,000
Total = $496,300
"	"This additional data will allow the Revenue Division to identify outstanding tax liabilities and increase collections.  Increased General Fund revenue is expected to range from approximately $780,000 to $2.3 million ongoing.  A similar increase is expected for Multnomah County. One-time audit recoveries are also expected to be substantial but cannot be estimated at this time.  The primary benefits of this IRS data exchange are:

1) A significant increase in compliance with all local income taxes administered by the Revenue Division, because key income and filing information will no longer be unknown and unverified.  This is especially important in the identification of taxpayers that have never filed tax returns with the Division.  The Division conservatively estimates a compliance increase of 1-3% for business income taxes and up to 5% for the Arts Education and Access Income Tax (Arts Tax), translating into millions of dollars of increased annual revenue for Portland and Multnomah County general funds, and the Arts Tax fund.  Using the midpoint of expected increased General Fund revenues, the Division estimates a decrease in the Business License Tax Gap of $1.5 million if this package is approved.  Substantial one-time revenues are also anticipated from taxpayers that have been operating businesses in Portland for years without paying taxes.

2) Authorization to receive FTI is a necessary step to achieve Modernized eFiling (MeF); MeF is the secure electronic receipt of tax filings from taxpayers using applications like TurboTax.  A substantial reduction in tax filing burden for hundreds of thousands of local taxpayers will occur when MeF is implemented in cooperation with the Oregon Department of Revenue.  Thousands of taxpayers will no longer need to fill out separate forms and mail copies of tax returns and other papers to the Revenue Division.  Other benefits include increased physical security of tax payments resulting from a higher number of taxpayers paying electronically rather than by check."																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
MF_33	BIBS Facilities - Jerome Sears Bldg Immediate Oc													Facilities				N	This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: "Make immediate occupancy improvements to mechanical systems, emergency power systems, and fire protection systems, plus ADA and restroom improvements required for long-term occupancy.  These improvements continue work started when $1 million was approved in the FY 2015-16 Fall BMP for immediate occupancy improvements required for use of the facility as a temporary homeless shelter.  Completion of this project will allow for continued development of the planned Westside Operations Center, as well as provide lease revenue to offset operations and maintenance costs. Having emergency response operations located in the Sears facility is considered to be essential for continuity of critical city operations on the west side of the Willamette River in the event of an emergency."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_34	BIBS Facilities - PSU/City Jasmine Block feasibi													Facilities				N	"This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: ""In partnership with Portland State University (PSU), allow Facilities to begin redeveloping the “Jasmine Block” property at SW 4th and SW Montgomery by conducting a preliminary site and building analysis. This property was identified as a key redevelopment site in 2014 by the City, PDC, and PSU. This supports the City’s portion in the preliminary site and building analysis 
(25% of contract services), which will inform the building size, scope, and the creation of owner agreements. Facilities Services staff will review consultant and PSU-produced materials, negotiate and complete an intergovernmental agreement and owner agreements with PSU and other building partners, as appropriate. """																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS	ONETIME										
MF_35	BIBS Facilities - Coordinated Campsite and shelt													Facilities				N	"This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's Requested Budget was submitted. It reflects an item included in the Requested Budget submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau's submission: ""Expand the scope of the Coordinated Campsite Cleanup program and related homeless services programs.  The package includes a Senior Management Analyst position to manage homeless related activities including shelter identification and commissioning, coordinated campsite cleanup and day storage, Right2DreamToo operations on City property, the corresponding increase in cross-bureau and interagency coordination, vendor management and contract administration, and other duties as assigned.  This could also include day storage administration and operating expenses, Right2DreamToo operating expenses, OMF project and property management services, and services provided by other bureaus.""  This decision package requested $500,000 and 1 FTE.

As per the Adopted Budget, this decision package has been amended to include a total of two 0.9 FTE Management Assistants (1.8 FTE total), and services, for a total package of $690,000.  Funding for services includes current campsites at Hazelnut Grove, Forgotten Realms, and Field of Dreams, funding for new campsites, one year of Right2DreamToo operating expenses and additional site development funding, portable toilets and dumpsters, and day storage.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS	ONGOING										
MF_36	BIBS Facilities City Hall Security													Facilities				N	This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: "Improved security for elected officials, employees, and visitors at City Hall through increased security staffing and installation of a more functional and extensive duress system. Significant concerns have been expressed regarding the security of occupants and visitors to City Hall.   "																													Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_37	BRFS Procurement Sustainability Spend Analysis													Procurement				N	This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: "Analyze the City's spending from FY 2014-15 to calculate and map the greenhouse gas (GHG), water consumption, waste generation, and related environmental impacts of the City's supply chain.  The results of the analysis will form the basis for a strategic approach to reduce the City's supply chain environmental and human health impacts over time.  The GHG analysis portion of this project fulfills actions in the Climate Action Plan, while also supporting other City sustainability policies such as the City's Sustainable Procurement Policy. "																													Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_38	BRFS Revenue Digital Equity Action Plan implemen													Revenue				N	This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: "The joint City/County Digital Equity Action Plan (DEAP) will be presented to City Council/County Commission for adoption in February.  Resources are needed to implement this plan; to develop an inventory of digital inclusion programs, services, and activities that would be available on a searchable web-based tool; and to develop sustainable revenue options. "																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_39	BRFS Procurement Construction Procurement positi													Procurement				N	This decision package has been added by CBO after the bureau's request was submitted. It reflects an item included in the submittal narrative (p.5-6) but not included as a decision package. The following narrative is from the bureau submission: "Staff are needed to work specifically with construction projects based on the large number of high dollar, complex projects coming forward during the next four to six years. Some of the City’s largest projects will be solicited and contracted by Procurement Services (for example, the Portland Building, Pioneer Courthouse Square, Willamette River Crossing, Parks bond projects, multiple PBOT road repair projects, etc.), all while needing to keep the normal volume of goods, services, construction and maintenance projects compliant and moving forward.  Positions are needed to keep up with the increased demand forecasted by the bureaus. "																													Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_40	PSSRP Savings-Reallocation													Revenue Division				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
MF_41	Grants - Manage Special Approps Grants													Grants				N	"This decision package was added after the OMF FY 2016-17 Requested Budget was submitted to the City Budget Office.  It proposes a strategy to implement recommendations in a City Auditor’s Report that was released on January 21, 2016.  The Requested Budget submission deadline was February 1, 2016.

This package requests $100,776 for a Financial Analyst position and associated materials and services within the Grants Management Division to manage grants made to outside organizations funded through Special Appropriations.  In response to the recommendations in Report 479 released on January 21, 2016 by the City Auditor's Office entitled ""City Council Grants: No competition and limited oversight,"" this position would allow the Grants Management Division (GMD) to ensure grant monitoring is consistent, financial transactions are accurate and timely, intended grant results are achieved and reported, and the grant results are used to inform the subsequent year's budget decisions.  The FY 2015-16 budget for Special Appropriations is $11,266,870. 

GMD provides grant management oversight to all City bureaus receiving grants, serving as a resource and conduit between city staff and granting agencies to help ensure compliance with all grant policies and federal regulations.  The current staffing level for GMD is 4 FTE.   The team is currently responsible for the management of the current grant budget of $67 million.  Grant management includes assuring that all grants are in compliance with regulations, assistance with application submissions and budget development, interpreting complex federal regulations, monitoring and billing, reviewing expenses for reimbursement eligibility, preparing and submitting reports, preparing the federally required annual Single Audit Report, and serving as a technical resource to the City bureaus.  Adding responsibility for managing and monitoring Special Appropriations grants to outside organizations is a logical extension of the Division's current duties.
"	In response to the City Auditor’s January 2016 audit of the City Council’s special appropriations process, GMD proposes to add a Financial Analyst to be responsible for management of the City’s special appropriations granted to outside organizations, to include: ensuring programmatic goals and funding objectives are aligned with the City’s core services and budget priorities; grant monitoring is consistent; financial transactions are accurate and timely, including overseeing various accounting functions, auditing documents submitted for payment for compliance with the grant agreement, coordinating development of the grant budgets with CBO; and intended grant results are achieved, reported, and used to inform the subsequent year’s budget decisions. This position will work with Council to ensure transparency, compliance with City policy, and consistent management of the special appropriation grants in all phases of the process, from funding request to final report.  The additional FTE will result in a centralized, consistent management of all grants in Special Appropriations, ensuring transparency and compliance with City policy.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_42	City Hall security																	N	"This package requests funding for three new security measures at City Hall. The first measure is for the installation of a more functional and extensive duress system at City Hall for $75,000 (one-time). The current duress system has limited ability to interface with other security components, is outdated, and is no longer supported by the manufacturer or any contractor.  When parts of the system fail, there are frequently no repairs available and those parts of the system are decommissioned. The system does not always work correctly, and alarms to other building tenants or security are very limited in focus. The new duress system would be a software-based system that allows users to discreetly activate a duress alarm from their workstation. The alert/alarm would be sent to the appropriate security personnel with discretion as to not escalate a potentially aggressive situation.  The system being considered comes as a base package with many optional expansions that allow tie-ins to wireless duress alarms, video inputs, audio inputs, and public announcement system outputs. The exact configuration needs to be determined in coordination with occupant needs in order to define specific costs, so this is a placeholder to allow for implementation of the base system at City Hall with some expansions. The second security measure is for two additional security cameras at City Hall for $37,000 (one-time). One security camera would be added at the 5th Avenue side of City Hall, outside the drive-through entrance of the portico, to allow visibility of the buildings across and adjacent to City Hall on 5th Avenue. There is a significant blind spot along the exterior of 5th Avenue because current cameras are located on the underside of the portico and view of 5th Avenue is obstructed. A second security camera would be added at City Council Chambers to survey the upper level, which currently has no camera coverage. The third security measure is to add security guard coverage at City Hall for $250,000 (ongoing). One guard will provide additional coverage during work, and after work hours, Monday through Friday.  The second guard will provide additional coverage during Council sessions and special events. 
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_43	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$316,868 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
$11,031 is added to the bureau budget to fund debt service for fueling station infrastructure improvements. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer. There is not net change in cost."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_44	Digital Equity Action Plan Implementation																	N	The joint City/County Digital Equity Action Plan (DEAP) was approved by the City Council on April 6, 2016 (Resolution 37199). It will go to the Multnomah County Commission April 13, 2016. This decision package requests 1 Program Coordinator FTE to oversee implementation of the DEAP ($130,000) and associated position/program support costs ($19,000). The position would develop community- based organization partnerships, identify and apply for grant opportunities, oversee sustainable funding strategy and work with the tech sector and providers to address digital equity.	Outcomes include increasing the number of low-income, elderly and at-risk households with internet connectivity, devices and expertise in how to use the internet to improve lives. Evaluation metrics will be developed as part of Plan implementation. This package supports Portland Plan strategy #61 and the draft Comprehensive Plan.																												Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_45	CityFleet - Fuel Stations Shift to IAs																	N	This decision package changes the CityFleet charge to bureaus for fuel station debt service from a cash transfer to an intergency, per guidance from central accounting.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
MF_46	FY 2015-16 Carryover: OCT, BHR, BRFS													FY 2015-16 Carryover: OCT, BHR, BRFS				N	"Revenue Division is requesting to carryover $23,665 in one-time General Fund Discretionary funding for the OCT litigation program in the Office for Community Technology.  $30,000 was carried forward from FY 2014-15 to FY 2015-16, and this $23,665 represents the remaining program balance.  The Division may true up in the Fall BMP if forecasted spending patterns change.

BHR-General Fund is requesting a programmatic carryover to fund the Office Support Specialist III position within the Diversity, Outreach, and Employment Resources program in FY 2016-17.  BHR has submitted the position as part of their 5% cut in the FY 2016-17 budget and the CBO is recommending that the cut be accepted. If this BMP request is approved, the position will be funded with one-time projected budget savings in FY 2015-16.  BHR, which has had vacancy savings during the fiscal year, will be reducing its budget this fiscal year to fund this request.  This OSS III position provides administrative support for the Senior Human Resources Analysts to assist with the completion of forms, processes and procedures as well as recruitment and community outreach.  A more thorough description of this position is in decision package MF_17 in the FY 2016-17 Requested Budget.

BHR-General Fund is requesting a programmatic carryover to fund the Office Support Specialist III position within the Human Resources Systems and Payroll Administrative program in FY 2016-17.  BHR has submitted the position as part of their 5% cut in the FY 2016-17 budget and the CBO is recommending that the cut be accepted. If this BMP request is approved, the position will be funded with one-time projected budget savings in FY 2015-16.  BHR, which has had vacancy savings during the fiscal year, will be reducing its budget this fiscal year to fund this request.  This OSS III position is primarily responsible for processing wage garnishments, writs and child support orders, direct deposit accounts, administering the TRIP program, and third party reconciliation and remittances (e.g. union dues, charitable deductions, etc.).  A more thorough description of this position is in decision package MF_18 in the FY 2016-17 Requested Budget.

In the FY 2016-17 Requested Budget recommendations, CBO is recommending that approximately $29,000 in funding for the UCT position in the Revenue Division be funded by an increased contribution from Multnomah County (see “Revenue Division – Support Revenue Collection, MF_31”).  As the Bureau does not anticipate that negotiations with the County will have concluded by the start of FY 2016-17, BRFS is requesting a $29,000 carryover to backfill this amount, with funding provided by the Accounting Division’s budget."	"OCT Litigation: CBO recommends the request but notes that the funding has been carried forward for multiple years beginning in FY 2010-11, contrary to the generally accepted use of one-time discretionary funding.


OSS DOER: Recommended as requested. CBO recommends the carryover for this position to address the current high volume of recruitments Citywide. Over the last several years, the number of recruitments has more than doubled while positions have been reduced in this section. This position is recommended as limited term only, to address this peak volume; it is expected to expire at the end of FY 2016-17.

OSS Payroll: Recommended as requested. Based on the bureau response, the position would be limited term with the goal being to provide temporary capcity and time to evaluate how the associated workload can best be addressed through reengineering and streamlining of process in other functional areas during FY 2016-17.

UCT Carryover from Accounting: Recommended as requested. As it is unlikely that negotiations with the County will be completed by the start of FY 2016-17, BRFS is requesting a $29,000 carryover to backfill this amount, with funding provided by the Accounting Division’s budget. Normally the carryover of ongoing funding would not be appropriate for the BMP process, but in this case the request is recommended as a stop-gap for a temporary shortfall in Revenue’s personnel services budget. A true-up may be necessary depending on the timeline and outcome of negotiations with the County."																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_47	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N	Revenue Division set-aside for radio replacement.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_48	BTS - Body Worn Camera - PISA Transfer																	N	This decision package transfers a PISA position from the Police Bureau to the Bureau of Technology Services.  The PISA position was included in the Police Bureau Body Worn Camera decision package, PL_10.  The position will provide ongoing technology support to the body worn camera program.																													N			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MF_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_51	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_52	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_53	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_54	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_55	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_56	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_57	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_58	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_59	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_60	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_61	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_62	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_63	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_64	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_65	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_66	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_67	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_68	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_69	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_70	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_71	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_72	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_73	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_74	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_75	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_76	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_77	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_78	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_79	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_80	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_81	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_82	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_83	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_84	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_85	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_86	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_87	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_88	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_89	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_90	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_91	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_92	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_93	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_94	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_95	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_96	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_97	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_98	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MF_99	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY	Office of the Mayor																	C																																														
MY_01	Last Thursday													Mayor's Office				N	This request is for $30,000 in ongoing General Fund resources to pay for the costs associated with holding Last Thursday events on Alberta Street. This funding will cover the costs of liability insurance, event maintenance and management.	These are city-wide expenses currently being paid out of the Mayor's Office budget based on one-time reimbursement requests in the Fall and Spring Budget Monitoring process. This request provides the ongoing funding for this ongoing program.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
MY_02	Transfer COCL to Special Appropriations													Mayor's Office				N	This request is to transfer $634,316 of ongoing General Fund resources currently appropriated to the Mayor’s Office to Special Appropriations for continued support of the Compliance Officer and Community Liaison (COCL) contract costs, COCL program support expenses, and support for the Community Oversight Advisory Board (COAB). The Office of Equity and Human Rights will submit a separate decision package in order to keep all program components together.	This package is a net zero realignment of resources that will result in the COCL program being budgeted independently and all program resources being budgeted together.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
MY_03	Summer Works Program													Mayor's Office				N	This request is for $135,000 in one time General Fund resources to support the SummerWorks and Black Male Achievement Initiative youth employment programs. The office budget also contains $180,000 in ongoing program support.	The additional one-time support will provide enough funding this year for the same number of interns as last year. In the Summer of 2015, 150 internship positions for youth ages 16-24 were made available through this program.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
MY_04	Tribal Liaison													Mayor's Office				N	This request is for $108,550 in ongoing Generlal Fund resources to fund a Commissioner Staff Representative in the Mayor’s Office to provide liaison services between the City and the local tribal communities. This position would be responsible for overall American Indian/Alaska Native policy development and overall coordination of the city’s relationships with Native American tribal governments and affiliated entities, and also American Indians and Alaska Natives living in Portland. It involves providing expertise on tribal history, treaties, sovereignty, self-governance, protocols, customs and traditions, natural resources, relevant economic enterprises and cultural properties.	The position would provide a primary point of contact for City and the tribal public, and also involves facilitating the identification and discussion of urban Indian needs in Portland and facilitating discussions of Portland’s interests with Pacific Northwest tribes.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
MY_05	Special Events Coordination													Mayor's Office				N	This decision package requests $315,857 in one-time resources to create the Special Events Office in an effort establish a one stop shop for all event organizers in the City. Included in the request are costs for three staff positions (two full time positions and a Community Service Aide), setting up of office space and other internal and external materials and services costs necessary to make the office functional in its pilot year.	The Special Events Office will consist of a one stop shop for all event organizers in the City, as well as satisfying the need for proactive management of Last Thursday and the Street Closure Program in Old Town (aka Night Market). Through fostering and promoting a vibrant industry in Portland for special events and entertainment, the Special Events Office will contribute to economic development, proactive livability policies for the entire city, and streamlined customer service.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
MY_06	Realign Security to Mayor's Office													Mayor's Office				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MY_07	OMF IA Balancing													Mayor's Office				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$1,882 for the Office's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building
$135 for the Office's allocation of annual fuel station debt service.
$97,979 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$3,450 for the office’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation.

"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MY_08	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N	$178 for radio replacement set-aside allocation																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MY_09	Portland Benefit Corporation (B Corp) Program													Mayor's Office				N	Transfers $75,000 of one-time General Fund resources from the Portland Development Commission to the Office of the Mayor for administration of the B Corp program.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
MY_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
MY_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI	Neighborhood Involvement																	C																																	INCLUDE													
NI_01	Continuation of Existing One-Time Positions													Crime Prevention, CNIC, Livability				N	"In FY 2015-16 Council authorized several one-time funded positions. In addition to advocating not to take the 5% cuts, continuation of these positions was determined as the highest priority by ONI and its BAC. This package includes $297,000 to continue funding for the following:
Mental Health Specialist - 1.0 FTE that assists people with lived experience of mental illness to participate in City processes and promotes inclusion and participation in civic processes. Although initially one major area of focus is in support of the City's implementation of the Department of Justice and Police Bureau settlement, the program provides training, technical assistance and support to all bureaus to assist in gaining skills, tools and confidence when providing services to individuals who are expressing symptoms of a mental illness and/or are experiencing stress that makes communication difficult or creates challenging situations. This package recommends overhead funding for this ongoing service, but in the absence of that requires one-time funding to continue these critical services.
New Portlander Program Specialist - 1.0 FTE that supports the New Portlander Policy Council as it transitions to and operates as a Commission providing advisory role to City Council and City agencies on immigrant and refugee issues. This position provides additional capacity to allow the existing 1.0 FTE to focus on and expand collaborative projects with other City agencies (Equity in Practice projects) and better utilize our immigrant and refugee community leaders (Community Engagement Liaisons) to provide culturally specific consultation to bureaus on their public involvement projects. As is proposed for the existing ongoing position for the New Portlander Program, this is proposed as an ongoing overhead funded position but in the absence of that requires one-time funding to continue this critical service.
Livability Administrative Support - 1.0 FTE Office Support Specialist that provides support to the Liquor Licensing and Noise Control programs. These programs currently share 1.0 FTE and this addition has allowed each high volume program dedicated administrative support. Both programs have the same ""busy season"" and have also experienced substantial increases in workload that requires paperwork processing, answering complaints, mailings and filings. ONI expects that with potential changes in the noise fee schedule that the ongoing need will be funded by revenues in the future. In the interim, this requests one-time funds to continue this critical immediate support need. 
"	"* Increase in number of people engaged of persons with lived experience of mental illness.
* Maintain support for the COCL/COAB related to the DOJ/PPB Settlement
* Increase in number of immigrants and refugees engaged.
* Increase in Equity in Practice projects with City bureaus.
* Dedicated support for the New Portlanders Policy Commission
* Increase in number of noise violation cases.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
NI_02	Pilot Engagement Around Housing Emergency													CNIC				N	"The City has declared a State of Emergency in Housing and Homelessness: the Office of Neighborhood Involvement and its community partners recognize this critical need.  This proposal will provide the capacity for ONI and our community partners and potentially an additional community-based advocacy organization(s) for low income renters and the houseless, supported by staff and in partnership with the city, to create and implement a robust public involvement effort around this issue which would bring the community along in understanding, engagement, and support. This will also provide a unique opportunity for collaboration between bureaus and the many ONI partners which have the relationships and expertise to engage the public effectively, particularly communities that are underserved.
Approximately $50,000 of this package would fund a part-time staff liaison within the Community and Neighborhood Involvement Center to coordinate the community partners and organizations of low income renters and houseless in Portland in partnership with the Housing Bureau and other city and county agencies. The bulk of the funding, $300,000, would be allocated to  ONI’s community partner organizations (Neighborhood Coalitions, Diversity and Civic Leadership organizations, Resolutions Northwest and Elders in Action) and potentially the additional community-based low income renters and/or houseless organization(s) who would collectively organize and promote community forums and other events, provide proper facilitation of dialogues and share timely information with the public around the issue along with plans to address the situation. The success of the larger effort relies on identifying leaders within impacted communities and engaging with existing and/or new partners already serving impacted communities. Specifically funding engagement opportunities around a major policy issue would mitigate the historic exclusion of certain populations.
"	"* Increases in the number of activities including several dozen town halls or community meetings to address localized affordable housing projects and proposed homeless camps
* Increase in the number of people participating. 
* More outreach communications about such community assemblies
* More partnerships with low income renters, housing and houseless advocacy organizations.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
NI_03	Community Building Grants													CNIC				N	"This package would provide funds for three high priority community building grants programs that promote civic engagement in Portland, particularly promoting opportunities and partnerships with communities that have been historically underserved:
Neighborhood Small Grants - $122,000
If the proposed cut is not taken, then additional funding of $122,000 would provide a level of funding similar to when it was originally created (not accounting for inflation) prior to deep cut years when the program was eliminated and only partially restored in subsequent years. This program enables communities to address grassroots-determined issues and community-building opportunities and provides a strategy for Coalitions and Neighborhood Associations to build organizational relationships with a wide range of community organizations. The small grants have been identified as a best practice for effective civic engagement and traditionally leverages over five to six times the amount awarded. Although it has been reduced and even eliminated in the past, it has always been tagged as a high priority for full restoration as soon as possible. These additional funds would provide for approximately 64 community grants, with an increase the number of partnerships with other organizations and communications outreach, and leveraging over $608,000. Small grants programs have their biggest impact on increased number of people volunteering and participating in these projects.
New City Voices - Diversity and Civic Leadership Small Grants - $65,000
ONI implemented a pilot project in FY 2015-16 to expand upon the Diversity and Civic Leadership program to provide small capacity building grants for emerging small nonprofits and mutual assistance associations within communities of color, immigrant and refugee communities. This package would continue the pilot for another year to award up to approximately thirteen $5,000 capacity building grants to support activities such as communications (website, database, outreach development), organizational development (board and fundraising trainings, community organizing strategy), and community development issues (forums on affordable housing, public safety, etc). DCL grants are expected to result in increased number of people participating in these grant funded projects, participation in trainings, communications and outreach, more community engagement activities, more partnerships with community-based organizations, and leveraged resources. 
Youth Action Grants - $10,000
ONI supports the Multnomah Youth Commission (MYC) with staff support and limited materials and services. The MYC is a group of young people ages 13-21, consisting of 75% youth of color and a significant percentage identifying at LGBTQ. This package would reinstate a grants program that existed previously at the City to provide small grants of approximately $1,000 each to expand collaborative efforts with other youth organizations and advance priorities on youth against violence efforts addressing youth involvement in gangs, sexual harassment, and cyber-bullying. Youth Action Grants are expected to result in increased numbers of youth participating in these grant funded projects, more community engagement activities, more partnerships with youth organizations, and leveraged resources.
"	"* Increased number and diversity of people volunteering and participating in community projects
* Increased number of Diversity and Civic Leadership community partners.
* Support for emerging non-profits and mutual assistance associations resulting in increased support for communities of color, immigrants and refugees.
* Increased number of grants – 64 neighborhood small grants, 13 DCL grants, 10 youth grants
*Increased support for youth identified action priorities, particularly around issue of gang violence.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
NI_04	Strategic Budget Planning - One-time													Admin				N	ONI has very limited management and administration, has received multiple new programs without sufficient overhead, and has significant priorities identified for program expansions to provide more functional capacity in order to provide effective services and advance the bureau's mission and goals. ONI and its BAC have determined that addressing funding inequities within the civic engagement programs is a priority. However, due to limited resources the bureau has been unable to dedicate sufficient staff time and focus to develop a strategic plan that incorporates all of these different areas of change and growth with clear timelines and priorities. This package would provide funding for 1.0 FTE and related materials and services to focus on developing a strategic budget plan with management, community partners and impacted public.	"* A 5 year strategic plan for funding to address bureau needs and funding inequities.
* Strategic guidance for ONI management and Council consideration as new funding is identified.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
NI_05	Accessibility Fund for ONI Programs - Pilot													CNIC				N	This package would provide funding to support ONI program efforts to overcome language, childcare, transportation, and ADA accessibility issues for individuals for whom these would be barriers to participation at events and meetings. Pays for language interpretation and translation, childcare vouchers, bus passes for transportation, and ADA accessibility such as American Sign Language or real-time captioning. ONI provided an accessibility fund for the Neighborhood Program beginning in FY 2007-08 and it proved very effective but was eliminated during deep budget cut years. Since then as ONI has expanded the partners, continues to address the requirements of Title VI, and makes progress on the goal of increasing the number and diversity of people engaged, the availability of a fund to support removing barriers to participation becomes increasingly critical. Currently existing discretionary materials and services line items have been woefully insufficient to address all requests for such accommodations and ONI’s planned translation of vital documents to address our Title VI plans. Although this level of funding is a starting place and may not address the needs of all of ONI's programs and partners, it would be an effective level to pilot and any future request for ongoing funding could be founded on the demand and effectiveness of the pilot.	"* Increased number of translated brochures and other distributed communications
* Increased number of people participating in ONI funded projects once these barriers are removed
* Increased participation in trainings.
* Increased partnerships with organizations of color, immigrants and refugees and people with disabilities.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
NI_06	Priority Adds to More Adequately Staff Programs													Admin, Crime Prevention, CNIC				N	"The ONI BAC identified a significant gap between existing staffing and adequate staffing for functional programs both at ONI and at external partners. This package provides funding for those that were identified as the most immediate priorities.
ONI Administration - $170,000-ONI has expanded existing programs and also taken on many new programs in recent years without adequate administration to effectively support these additions. The bureau has operated with just 3 FTE (Director, Operations Manager and Financial Analyst) to manage all administration and that has not increased despite the recent additions of Marijuana, Noise Control, New Portlander, Youth Commission, Diversity and Civic Leadership, and East Portland Action Plan. In addition to staffing increases, many of these programs have added significant increases in financial processing including revenue programs and grant administration. This package would add 1.0 FTE as an Administrative Assistant to support the Director and general bureau operations and 1.0 FTE Management Assistant to improve grants coordination/processing and operations support.
Public Involvement Best Practices Program Support - $91,000- The program provides citywide support to strengthen and institutionalize public involvement principles, policies, processes and practices. Since its inception in 2008, it has been staffed with 1.0 FTE but the demands, scope and impact of this program continue to grow. Although the program requires an ongoing increase in staff, it also could benefit even if only one-time funding is available to focus on immediate high-value and high-impact projects of the Public Involvement Advisory Council including: surveys regarding City notification policies and practices; content development and implementation of a pilot digital engagement project; community meetings to assess current satisfaction and feedback on how the City may practice more racially equitable and effective public involvement work; and citywide assessment of Boards and Commissions. This addition is proposed as overhead funded. 
Youth Development Program Support - $40,000 - ONI supports the Multnomah Youth Commission to provide a voice to the City on issues impacting policy affecting young people, as well as stereotypical community perceptions. The County also provides support to the commission and this increase would match the County's contributions. This would add 0.5 FTE Assistant Program Specialist to assist with logistics of application process, annual retreats, scheduling rooms, taking minutes, preparing materials, on-site logistics, transporting youth, distributing information, developing social media content and managing contact database. 
Crime Prevention Administrative Support - $65,000 - The Crime Prevention program has 13 FTE consisting of 12 program staff and one manager and suffers like the rest of the bureau with no administrative staff support. Working from an office separate from the main ONI offices there is no support other than that provided by the manager for activities such as front desk, office supply orders, printing, or building and technology maintenance. This package would add 1.0 FTE Office Support Specialist to provide administrative support to the program.
"	"* Adequate financial and administrative support for existing programs assigned to ONI, including basic support for Director’s Office, Operations, Youth Development and Crime Prevention.
* Timely processing of over 75 grants annually.
* Ongoing systemic improvements in the ability of the City bureau public involvement programs to address the City’s Title VI and meet recently adopted citywide racial equity goals #2 and #3.
* Small increase in number of people participating in trainings and partnerships with other government agencies.
* Increase the number of City staff trained on youth/adult partnership model
* Increase the number of government agency partnerships working on MYC identified issues
* Expanded outreach resulting in more people receiving the monthly e-newsletter.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
NI_07	Mandatory 5% ONI General Fund Reduction													Crime Prevention, Livability, CNIC				N	"The following reductions are submitted in ONI's reduction package to meet the required 5% cut of $393,555. With the exception of the conversion to overhead funding, the other program cuts have significant impact on ONI's capacity to continue to advance progress on the bureau's mission and goals.
Convert citywide programs to overhead funding - ($155,935)- The New Portlander Program was transferred from the Office of Equity and Human Rights in FY 2014-15 with 1 FTE to provide technical assistance and support to ensure that the City is a responsive gateway city to immigrants and refugees. The function of the program provides services to all City bureaus through its Equity in Practice, Community Engagement Liaison and New Portlanders Policy Council programs, particularly to those bureaus that have substantial interaction with the public.
Similarly the Disability program provides technical assistance and support for citywide policy to be more inclusive of people with disabilities, community-building outreach efforts and new funding for leadership development, as well as disaster planning and preparedness for people with disabilities and frail older adults. Conversion of these programs to overhead funding results in a savings to General Fund.
Eliminate 1 FTE Crime Prevention Coordinator - ($80,000)- The only way to achieve a cut within the Crime Prevention program is elimination of staff. This cut would eliminate one of the citywide Crime Prevention Coordinator assignments, cutting in half the support for organized public safety-focused community groups. 
Reduce capacity for free graffiti removal - ($54,620)- The Graffiti Abatement Program has suffered significant cuts in prior years, and although critical to the City it is less core to ONI's primary mission around engagement so is again proposed for cuts. This reduction would reduce the free removal resources by over a third, thus impacting the support provided to disadvantaged communities victimized by vandalism but with inadequate resources to remove the graffiti. ONI would need to increase enforcement methods to have owners remove graffiti, but this is a challenge for many of the victims of this crime. With the elimination of the Graffiti Investigations Unit due to limited staff resources in Police, the graffiti enforcement on vandals will be reduced so to also have a reduction in cleanups is concerning as it would make Portland an increased target for vandals. 
Eliminate Community Building Grants -Neighborhood Program - ($103,000)- This cut would again eliminate the Neighborhood Small Grants program, which is one of the best practices identified for effective community engagement, leverage over five to six times the amount awarded, and highly supported by the community. This is a difficult cut to put forward as having this effective program fluctuate negatively impacts the community's trust in the City. Unfortunately, this is again one of the only program areas that could manage to be eliminated without significantly impacting staff capacity at the District Coalitions or requiring cuts to the most underfunded high priority program (DCL). The grants provide neighborhood and community based organizations an opportunity to build community, attract new and diverse membership, and sustain those already involved. The program is already only funded at approximately half of its original funding, has been reduced and eliminated previously and only recently restored to the minimum level required to be feasible to sustain. This is a high priority program for restoration as soon as possible if this cut is required.
"	"* Maintain New Portlander and Disability Programs with overhead funding. Performance measures maintained with GF cut.

* Reduced support for community organizing around crime prevention issues, particularly for non-traditional organizing, communities of color and immigrants and refugees.

* Reduced number of square footage of graffiti removal by approximately 1/3. 

* Increased number of graffiti abatement under warrant.

* Reduced number of people involved or volunteering in the community

* Reduced number of partnerships between neighborhoods and organizations serving underrepresented communities.

* Elimination of Small Grants Program, eliminating over $600,000 leveraged
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
NI_08	Restorative Justice																	N																														N			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
NI_09	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$9,144 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
$101 for payment for fuel station debt service costs
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
NI_10	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Noise Program																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
NI_11	FY 2015-16 Carryover: New Portlander Program																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
NI_12	FY 2015-16 Carryover: DCL Grants																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
NI_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
NI_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
OE	Office of Equity and Human Rights																	C																																														
OE_01	Provide M&S Budget For BMA Program													Community Equity & Engagement				N	This program was established in the FY 2015-16 Adopted Budget, but only provided funding sufficient to support the program coordinator.  This request will provide a materials and services budget to support the BMA Summer Youth Experience Program, a collaboration with Worksystem’s to provide culturally specific curriculum and support to African American young men in the Summerworks program.  The purposes are: (1) To support African American young men both during and beyond their Summerworks internship to successful completion and career development, (2) To raise their awareness of those personal/professional skills that will help them be successful in their job placement and careers, (3) To provide a safe space where they can fellowship and debrief with similar situated young men, (4) To provide them with a feedback loop allowing for caring adults professionals to mediate and or advocate for them when workplace issues arise, (5) To raise their increase ability to recognize and understand systemic and institutional racism and how they affect them, (6) To allow them to lead an event increase their understanding of how system/institutional racism affects other young Black men in Portland, and help them build relationships with other young Black men.	This request will provide a materials and services budget to support BMA program activities associated with: engaging and convening community, public, business, and philanthropic leaders; and sponsoring and facilitating events and programs that promote personal and professional development for Black men and boys.  Outcomes include 12-18 participants in weekly training series; 25 participants in annual summit; and, creation of a culturally appropriate network to support program participants towards personal and professional achievement.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
OE_02	Add Back Assistant Program Specialist													Multiple				N	OEHR has four program staff expected to provide assistance and training to the entire City workforce (i.e., currently over 5600 authorized City employees) as well as staff two commissions. This staffing level is insufficient to provide the depth and breadth of service city bureaus require. This request will create a full-time assistant program specialist to raise the level of service OEHR provides to City bureaus.	This support will allow the staff to provide more assistance and training commensurate with their level of expertise and will also give OEHR the capacity to develop more administrative supports for our programs (e.g., systems for tracking and reporting, the need for which is growing in OEHR programs.)  Thus, OEHR expects this request will allow it to train 100 additional employees; conduct 10 additional Title II / Title VI consultations; and provide 7 additional consultations to bureaus and elected officials from PCoD and HRC.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
OE_03	Add Equity Training Position													Citywide Equity Program				N	OEHR offers Equity 101 to all city employees. In 2015 City Council made the training mandatory. Within two days, regularly scheduled trainings through City Learner were full through 2016. OEHR works to accommodate bureaus who have additional location and time requirements (i.e. trainings for 100  130 employees in the Water Bureau at the Interstate facility, trainings for Parks employees in multiple locations). OEHR also needs to develop a corresponding Disability Equity 101 training.	"Without this position, OEHR will take substantially longer to meet Council's directives that all City employees receive Equity 101 trainings and that OEHR create a Disability Equity training track.  This would also delay the development of the Disability Equity training substantially.  OEHR expects this request will allow it to train an additional 150 City employees.  This employee will also research and develop of a unique Disability Equity 101 training for City employees.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
OE_04	Add Equity Analyst Position													Citywide Equity Program				N	"OEHR's work to establish institutional practices to assure an equitable delivery of services to all Portlanders has been readily embraced by city bureaus, staff and elected officials.  Bureaus are expected to have completed their 5 year racial equity plans by June 30, 2016 and Equity 101 has been adopted as a mandatory training with about half of current employees having received the training through 2015.  OEHR needs to expand its staff to meet the growing demand for technical assistance and support. Our strategic plan includes being organized to have equity analysts who each have portfolios of bureaus, much like CBO.  This position would also support the FRE program participants.
"	OEHR expects this request will allow it to provide 8 additional equity consultations to bureaus and commissioner's offices, resulting in four additional institutionalized changes to policy; broader availability of technical assistance to bureaus achieving the goals in the bureau five-year racial equity plans; and more impactful support for the membership of the FRE learning cohort.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
OE_05	Realign HRC and PCOD budgets													Community Equity & Engagement				N	There has been a lack of equity between the Human Rights Commission (HRC) and Portland Commission on Disability (PCoD) budgets largely due to the fact that PCoD incurs higher accommodation costs in order to support the involvement of many of the commissioners.	This realignment establishes the desired equity in ensuring access for persons living with disabilities by moving $4,500 from HRC's budget to the PCoD budget.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
OE_06	Transfer COCL Support Position													COCL/COAB Program Support				N	OEHR has been providing space and HR support for the administrative support position for the COAB. The COCL has located a new office that is more accessible to the community and better suited to their needs.  This package, in concert with packages submitted by other bureaus, will house the COCL budget within a City Special Appropriation.  OEHR may continue to provide limited HR function.	OEHR anticipates no impact upon functions of this position.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REALIGN											
OE_07	Program M&S Budget Reductions													Multiple				N	This decision package makes targeted reductions in the materials & services budgets for Administration ($9,873), Training & Education ($2,000), Civil Rights ($4,000), Communications ($1,500).  It also eliminates the balance of funding ($15,012) that came to OEHR for the COCL-COAB program support position over and above projected salary and benefits costs.	None of these reductions change the quantitative outcomes of the programs.  The effects, rather, would be more subtle and qualitative (e.g., materials used in training, public engagement meeting spaces & refreshments and branding & communication materials will be either fewer or lower in quality).																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
OE_08	Eliminate Assistant Program Specialist													Multiple				N	Using realigned internal resources, OEHR added a .6 FTE assistant program specialist during the FY 2015-16 budget cycle. Eliminating this position is the only way to achieve the required 5% cut without deeply scaling back existing programs.	This will impact OEHR’s ability to respond to the increasing demand for service to bureaus and commissions.  It will also reduce the bureau's ability to deliver the volume of trainings needed to meet Council's directive that all City employees receive Equity 101; OEHR estimates 100 fewer City employees trained.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
OE_09	OMF IA Balancing													Administration				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$235 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
OE_10	FY 2015-16 Carryover: FRE Contract																	N	OEHR is requesting Council appropriate $40,000 of the revenue associated with the OEHR director's three-month "executive loan" to the City of Oakland in order to carry forward $40,000 of existing general fund budget into FY 2016-17 to support the Fellowship for Racial Equity (FRE) program.  This new program will be a year-long intensive training cohort designed to build organizational capacity to achieve Racial Equity goals throughout the bureaus.  The funding will allow OEHR to supplement existing resources by contracting with an outside organization with specific experience in growing organizational capacity to implement racially equitable policies and practices in local government through cohort-model training.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
OE_11	FY 2015-16 Carryover: BMA Contract																	N	OEHR is requesting that Council approve the carry over of $15,000 general fund resources to support the BMA Summer Works Experience.  These funds would specifically allow OEHR to contract with a community-based organization to support the employment-focused activities for the BMA cohort of participants in the larger Summer Works program led by Worksystems, Inc, Multnomah County and the City of Portland.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
OE_12	Equitable Contracting & Purchasing Commission													Citywide Equity Program				N	Transfers $25,000 of ongoing General Fund resources from the Office of Management & Finance (General Fund) to the Office of Equity & Human Rights (General Fund) for administration of the Equitable Contracting & Purchasing Commission																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
OE_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
OE_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
OE_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA	Commissioner of Public Affairs																	C																																														
PA_01	Eviction Prevention Services													Gateway Center for Domestic Violence				N	"The Gateway Center for Domestic Violence (GCDV) Services is requesting $60,000 in one time General Fund resources to provide vital and largely unavailable eviction prevention services to an estimated 60 to 75 households. The Gateway Center provides services to more than 2,000 unduplicated survivors of domestic violence each year. Many have made the decision to separate from abusive partners, and have sought services to support their transition. Oregonian women head of households are 3 times as likely to live in poverty as Oregonian women in general. It often takes a woman a great deal of effort to stabilize financially following a separation. Further, the Portland area has a serious dearth of affordable housing, and the rental market in general is very tight. The majority of available resources aimed at housing for domestic violence survivors require a new placement and therefore cannot be used to prevent a survivor from losing her current rental. The Gateway Center has two housing specialists who operate full time from an office within the Center. With no additional staffing, those specialists could administer the eviction prevention dollars, overcoming a significant gap in services during a particularly challenging time for housing and homelessness in the Portland area.
"	This add package would provide resources as part of the State of Housing Emergency by allowing the Gateway Center to continue to provide eviction prevention services for 60 to 75 households. This supports the Housing Key Performance measure "Number of Households Prevented from Becoming Homeless."																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
PA_02	OMF IA Balancing													Commissioner's Office				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$4,366 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building ($877 - Commissioner's Office; $3,489 - Children's Levy).
$50,337 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$1,773 for the office's allocation of the Daycare Center relocation."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PA_03	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_04	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PA_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK	Portland Parks & Recreation																	C																																														
PK_01	Recreation Arbitration													Recreation				N	"In May 2015, a state arbitrator issued a ruling in a long-standing dispute between labor and management regarding the role of part-time seasonal employees in providing recreation services. The arbitrator ruled that work contained in class specifications for those recreation classifications covered by the collective bargaining agreement could only be done by bargaining unit employees. levels.
This package addresses funding in FY 2016-17 for two major categories of change: levels.
Phase 1 was implemented as of July 2015. This phase included four parts:
* All Customer Service Rep II ($1.3 million)
* Pre-School Teachers ($751,000)
* Assistant Pool Managers ($254,000)
* Summer Camp Directors ($48,000)
Phase 1 created a total of 86 full-time and part-time permanent positions, and equates to 51 full-time equivalent positions.
Phase 2 is to be implemented no later than October 1, 2016.  An additional 50 FTE will be needed to maintain service levels, including 47 FTE bargaining unit positions and three non-represented positions. This work will represent a redesign and aggregation of work formerly done by part-time, seasonal employees to maximize the number of full-time or near full-time positions in a way that makes operational sense for service delivery in PP&R facilities and programs. It does not represent an increase in service levels."	If funding is not available to maintain service levels under the settlement agreement, PP&R would need to implement significant service level reductions. Recreation services would be redesigned to utilize existing funded bargaining unit positions to deliver the highest priority services feasible with current funding. This would likely include closure of some facilities and/or elimination of some programs. The specifics require analysis due to the heavy reliance on program revenue to fund basic operations and full-time staff positions. Reductions to programs or facility hours of operations will impact program revenue, compounding the service impacts of implementing the settlement agreement. The agreement calls for PP&R and labor to work together to minimize service impacts.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
PK_02	Parks for New Portlanders													Community				N	"This package is a request to continue last year’s pilot program that targets the increased participation of underserved and immigrant and refugee communities in Portland by expanding culturally responsive recreation activities and increasing outreach. The program will expand on World Cup Soccer and and other recreational programming offered for immigrant and refugee communities. Funding will support full-time positions engaged in outreach and programming, as well as implementing and evaluating the program expansions. These positions will also provide cultural competency training for managers on how to create more culturally responsive programs and environments.

"	If this package is funded, immigrant and refugee communities will participate in recreation and employment opportunities at a higher rate. Community members will become more civically engaged and be able to advocate for and achieve imporvements in park services and amenities.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
PK_03	Ranger Expansion to Address Homelessness													Security				N	The central issue facing the Park Ranger program for 2016 will be an increased demand for service east of the Willamette River. This package requests eight additional employees to the ranger program to leverage City Council’s investments in helping Portland’s residents who are experiencing homelessness including those camping in parks and park facilities.	"This package will help the City address our growing homeless issue as a front-line service connectors who come into daily contact with homeless camps in our City's developed parks, trails and natural areas. Rangers will be able to connect those experiencing homelessness to services and offer education on how to use parks with low ecological impact. It will also provide our park users a perception of safety as they visit our parks, trails and natural areas that will now have routine park ranger presence that previous had little to none.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
PK_04	Reduce Summer Free for All Program													Recreation				N	"This package eliminates Movies in the Park and Summer Concerts in the Park - including the Washington Park Summer Festival. This package also eliminates the citywide mobile recreation activities including the mobile rock wall, and those staffed playground sites that do not offer lunches. Summer playground sites that serve federal free lunch, as well as the East Portland mobile recreation program, will remain.

"	This elimination of summer movies and concerts will cause the city to lose access to over $225,000 in annual grassroots neighborhood fund raising as well as an estimated $100,000 in larger corporate donations, and a loss of $1 million in in-kind advertising and other donations. The reduction in the playground program will result in the elimination of playground programs at iconic parks such as Grant, and all west side playground programs, as well as PP&R’s ability to support special events at many neighborhood-based sites and events. Many movies and concerts are offered in neighborhoods with significant economic challenges and which are home to immigrants and people of color; losing access to these free community events further reduces their access to services. The same is true for people living with disabilities who would lose access to community events that are located in accessible parks spaces on public transportation lines.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
PK_05	Reduce Teen Program													Community				N	This package eliminates the Teen Force program at Mt. Scott Community Center (MSCC). Existing teen programs would remain at Charles Jordan, East Portland, Matt Dishman, and Montavilla Community Centers. MSCC teens would no longer have teen nights, teen room (homework assistance), teen trips, open gyms, teen volunteer corp, girls groups, and free teen fitness center.	"A long-standing, site-based teen program would no longer be available at MSCC, one of our largest community centers. Research shows that out-of-school time (afternoons, evenings, weekends, summer) is when youth are most vulnerable to risk of violence, crime, teen pregnancy, substance abuse, disengagement, etc. Research also shows that for youth who are at-risk, one of the single most important factors promoting positive youth development is involvement with a responsible adult.  Each of our site-based teen programs addresses these needs.  

Youth who are at-risk live in every area of our city, and low-income youth rely disproportionately on the types of low-cost or free programs we are able to offer."																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
PK_06	Reduce Major Maintenance Allocation													Infrastructure				N	This package reduces annual General Fund support for Major Maintenance from just over $1.5 million to roughly $1.3 million.  Major Maintenance is the primary mechanism for funding capital project repairs for a system of assets valued at $1.36 billion. In 2015, PP&R’s unfunded gap for maintenance is estimated at $24.8M over each of the next ten years.	Reduction of Major Maintenance funding will contribute to growth in unfunded maintenance and will erode the positive trajectory of asset repair that is currently underway with the Parks Replacement Bond ($68M funding) and Council-supported one-time General Fund allocations to specific capital projects. This reduction contributes to a range of program impacts from safety and efficiency to the quality of the parks user experience.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
PK_07	Delay Hiring Seasonal Maint Workers until June													Infrastructure				N	Seasonal Maintenance Workers (SMWs) typically start to be rehired in March, and their numbers and hours increase until peak summer levels in June. This package would delay SMW hiring until June.	"During the delay, seasonal restrooms will be closed; irrigation tune-ups, pressure washing courts/picnic tables/benches, graffiti removal, and horticultural projects will be delayed; and trash will accumulate in parks.

Developed parks provide the most basic level of park service and are especially important for community members who don’t have ready access to open space, back yards, etc.  A decline in the condition and quality of parks will tend to have a disproportionate impact on users who live in apartments and higher density environments without many amenities."																												Y			INCLUDE	04	REDUCTION											
PK_08	Reduce SUN Community School Program													Recreation				N	This package would close two SUN Community School sites: Mt. Tabor and Beaumont. Compared to the other nine PP&R sites, these two schools have fewer students who qualify for free and reduced lunch.	"These closures eliminate all services such as daily homework assistance, free summer lunches, referrals for food/housing/utility assistance, parent educational classes, and recreational enrichment and sports programs. 

SUN schools are a key anti-poverty strategy, and SUN services are targeted to meet the needs of students, and their families, who are at-risk, experiencing lower incomes, and diverse. In more affluent neighborhoods, alternative service providers will be harder for those in need to access.   
"																												Y			INCLUDE	05	REDUCTION											
PK_09	Reduce Aquatics Program													Recreation				N	This package closes Buckman Pool, where annual attendance is low in comparison to other PP&R pools. This package also closes Columbia Pool on Sundays; closes Matt Dishman, Mt. Scott, and East Portland Community Center pools during midday and reduces those sites' play swims from 7 days to 4 days per week.	The closure of Buckman Pool would require residents to travel 2 to 5 miles to access another public swimming pool. Sunday and midday closures will impact families and seniors the most and is expected to negatively impact program revenue at those sites.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	REDUCTION											
PK_10	Eliminate Support for Sellwood Community Center													Recreation				N	This package discontinues General Fund support for Sellwood Community Center. The center may be closed, operated as a rental-only facility, or opened under a new business model.	All classes and events will be discontinued including preschool, after school, and youth camps. With the relocation of the Boys & Girls Club from the Sellwood-Moreland neighborhood to Rockwood, this closure will further reduce recreational options in this neighborhood.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	REDUCTION											
PK_11	Elimination of Dutch Elm Disease Treatment													Infrastructure				N	This package eliminates the Dutch Elm Disease (DED) Management Program. Discontinued work will include 1) monitoring for infected American elm trees, 2) inoculating trees against disease, and 3) city removal and disposal of infected street trees.	"With this package, adjacent property owners will become responsible for elm tree removal and because the positions affected have other duties, other tree removal, maintenance, and emergency response work will be reduced. 

The City of Portland has one of the most magnificent American elm populations in the country, largely due to this DED program. Without rapid detection and removal of infected trees, the disease will spread. Elms will be cut down decades before their normal life expectancy. This includes, but is not limited to, the large elms of the North and South Park Blocks, Eastmoreland Golf Course, Wallace Park, Overlook Park, Laurelhurst Park, Couch Park, Gabriel Park, and Heritage Tree American elms such as the “Burrell Elm”, Heritage Tree #1 at 1111 SW 10th Avenue. In addition, adjacent property owners, rather than PP&R, will be required to remove Dutch Elm-Disease-infected street elm trees once they die or become hazardous. These include the large street elm trees of neighborhoods like Ladd’s Addition and Eastmoreland. Finally, these positions perform other non-DED services--tree removals, maintenance, planting, and 24/7 emergency response to clear City rights of-way of fallen trees. These services will be reduced, including delays in clearing city roads of fallen trees and debris during storms."																												Y			INCLUDE	08	REDUCTION											
PK_12	Natural Areas Reduction													Infrastructure				N	This package eliminates one summer seasonal staff and associated supplies.	Cleaning, maintenance, and restoration of trails and natural areas will be reduced. Impacts of this reduction package include more garbage and graffiti along regional trails and in natural areas.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	REDUCTION											
PK_13	Reduce Admin Support for Director's Office													Support				N	This package eliminates a Senior Administrative Specialist position.	This reduction reduces the bureau's ability to complete strategic projects, track and monitor legislative sessions, and support the entire Director’s Office division.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	REDUCTION											
PK_14	Reduce Central Services Staffing													Infrastructure				N	"This package eliminates three positions: Automotive Equipment Operator, Maintenance Mechanic, and Turf Technician.  

"	Elimination of the first position will reduce the Heavy Equipment group's capacity to complete projects and respond to emergency requests. Elimination of the second position will reduce the park amenities group's capacity to keep pace with park system growth, particularly for playground inspection and repair. Elimination of the third position will reduce trim and detail mowing near sidewalks, curbs, trees, and shrubs.  All of the reductions will decrease park maintenance levels, safety, beauty, and the quality of park user experiences.																												Y			INCLUDE	11	REDUCTION											
PK_15	Reduce Customer Service Center Staffing													Community				N	This package eliminates a Customer Service Center position. If additional revenues are realized prior to July, a limited-term position will be created to mitigate the loss in staff.	This reduction increases customer wait time to purchase permits for park amenities, particularly in the spring/summer season.																												Y			INCLUDE	12	REDUCTION											
PK_16	Shift Interactive & Decorative Fountains to IA													Infrastructure				N	"This package requests an interagency transfer of ratepayer funds from the Water Bureau for the maintenance and operation of the City fountains, pursuant to a recent legal ruling that ratepayer funds can legally be used for fountain maintenance. Operation and maintenance should remain with PP&R because PP&R’s fountain maintenance staff are well-versed in caring for these fountains in compliance with governing water quality standards, and PP&R invested in building a SCADA system to monitor and efficiently manage the fountains to ensure they meet State health regulations. 
"	"If ratepayer funding is restored, no service level impacts would occur.  If funding is eliminated, four FTE would be laid off, and the community would lose access to 18 fountains, 11 of them interactive fountains that offer summer recreation and cooling opportunities.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	13	REDUCTION											
PK_17	Reduce Bureau Unemployment Reserve													Support				N	This package reduces current unemployment reserves.	The current level reflects the prior 5-year average spike in unemployment costs; this, combined with declining unemployment rates and associated costs over the last 1-2 years indicate this reduction would not result in unreasonable financial risk unless filled positions are cut.																												Y			INCLUDE	14	REDUCTION											
PK_18	Revenue - Pursue Lease & Licensing Opportunities													Infrastructure				N	"This package pursues business opportunities to lease space that would not impact PP&R services.

"	This revenue will be used to backfill lost General Fund support.																												Y			INCLUDE	15	REDUCTION											
PK_19	Revenue - Increase Parking Rates													Infrastructure				N	"This package increases daily parking fees at the 1720 SW Naito Parkway parking lot to bring them into alignment with PBOT fee increases at Block J, a similar parking lot in the area.

"	This revenue will be used to backfill lost General Fund support.																												Y			INCLUDE	16	REDUCTION											
PK_20	Mt. Scott Community Center Roof Repair													Infrastructure				N	"This package repairs the roof over Mt. Scott Community Center, including the pool. Numerous active leaks have resulted in customer health/safety impacts; these have been temporarily repaired but eventually this leaking could cause longer-term damage to the building itself. Replacement will likely trigger some seismic upgrades and insufficient or non-existent worker fall protection, which, if not replaced, is an OSHA violation.  
"	Repairing this asset will lower operational costs by reducing reactive maintenance needs.																												Y			INCLUDE	19	ADDS	ONETIME										
PK_21	Halprin Sequence Restoration Partnership													Infrastructure				N	This package addresses the most critical repair needs at the four Halprin Sequence iconic park fountains to correct unsafe, non-compliant electrical service violations; outdated fountain equipment room ventilation; water filtration and water treatment equipment; exposed electrical conduit, wiring and rebar; and lack of functioning lighting. Degrading fountain walls and basins, failing fountain and stormwater piping, and failing electrical systems pose critical life of asset and safety concerns, and result in significant water leaks and loss. This project leverages $200,000 in existing City funds for schematic design of renovations. Additionally, there is a $2.15 million planned voluntary Local Improvement District (LID) investment, the first of its kind, and $350,000 in additional anticipated private fundraising.	Repairing assets in these parks will lower operational costs by reducing reactive maintenance needs.																												Y			INCLUDE	20	ADDS	ONETIME										
PK_22	Washington Park Pipe Re-lining													Infrastructure				N	This project re-lines the 4000+ feet of sanitary and stormwater pipe in Washington Park to extend its life. The failing piping is causing sewage spills, backed-up restroom facilities, and contamination issues. Each sewage spill has violated DEQ regulations. The most recent failure caused sewage flow below the International Rose Test Garden, which will be celebrating its Centennial in 2017. This project is to re-line the piping to extend its life. This project would be accomplished over a 3-year period.	Repairing this asset will lower operational costs by reducing reactive maintenance needs.																												Y			INCLUDE	21	ADDS	ONETIME										
PK_23	Boiler Replacement Package													Infrastructure				N	This package replaces failing boilers, piping, and heat registers at Mt. Scott Community Center (MSCC), Columbia Pool, and Peninsula Park Community Center (PPCC). The MSCC and PPCC boilers have been experiencing frequent failures, causing reductions in levels of service and increasing reactive maintenance; the Columbia Pool boiler is at imminent failure. Each of these locations has only one boiler, meaning that boiler failures cause facility closures.If the $750,000 is funded, energy rebate funds would be available to leverage up to $86,600 in additional funding towards these repairs.	Repairing this asset will lower operational costs by reducing reactive maintenance needs.																												Y			INCLUDE	22	ADDS	ONETIME										
PK_24	ADA Barrier Removal & Transition Plan Implement													Infrastructure				N	This package addresses the highest priority ADA barriers in the Park System, which are barriers to access paths of travel – barriers that prevent people from having basic access to parks and community centers. This package includes $100,000 to perform sidewalk repairs and maintenance, $200,000 to address accessibility issues related to the highly-used Riverplace Esplanade, and $200,000 to address other prioritized barriers to access in the park system, concentrating on areas that serve some of our most vulnerable community members.	Our most vulnerable community members will be more able to access parks and community centers.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS	ONETIME										
PK_25	Equitable Access for Low-Income Portlanders													Recreation				N	Demand for scholarships to enable access to recreation services has steadily climbed in recent years, nearly triple pre-recession levels. This package requests general fund support to develop PP&R’s scholarship program, reach underserved communities, and meet the need to provide scholarships to youth whose families are experiencing lower incomes.	Our most vulnerable community members, particularly youth, will be more able to access recreation services.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
PK_26	Tree Code Amendments													Infrastructure				N	This package funds an update to the Title 11 Tree code. The new code was implemented in January 2015. One year of experience operating with the new code has made clear that certain parts of the regulations need to be revisited and changed to facilitate more effective and efficient implementation while maintaining consistency with the intentions of Title 11 and other City codes.	Title 11 Tree Code implementation will be more effective and efficient.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
PK_27	Community Center Equip for Increased Security													Infrastructure				N	"This package installs closed-circuit cameras and exit lockdown mechanisms at community centers. Currently 17 sites either do not have CCTV installed or are in a state of partial failure. This package also installs building lockdown mechanisms to three of our large community centers in higher risk areas of the City. 
"	Investing in this one-time expense significantly improves the ability of PP&R to quickly and safely secure these busy public facilities and coordinate with security and law enforcement, as well as document actions for post-incident enforcement.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	ADDS											
PK_28	New Community Gardens for Vulnerable Populations													Community				N	This package places funds in a capital construction trust account to be used in cooperation with community partners to develop five new community gardens east of I-205 in the next 3 to 5 years.	More vulnerable community members will have access to gardens where they can grow healthy food and build relationships within their community.																												Y			INCLUDE	08	ADDS											
PK_29	Leverage State Funding for Renew Forest Park													Infrastructure				N	PP&R was successfully awarded $1.5 million in State funding for the Renew Forest Park initiative. This package requests a limited-term Program Manager who will plan, organize, manage, and participate in the work of staff, partners, and consultants who are engaged in developing, implementing, and administering Renew Forest Park: a 10-year, $24 million PP&R initiative.	This initiative restores wildlife habitat and includes invasive species removal; it rebuilds trails, signage, and bridges; and improves access to Forest Park by providing an official entrance and nature center in Forest Park.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	ADDS											
PK_30	Restore Summer Swims													Recreation				N	During the most recent recession, PP&R eliminated funding for Sunday and holiday operations at several outdoor pools. This package re-opens Montavilla Pool on Sundays and expands Independence Day opening to all PP&R pools.	Community members will have more access to outdoor public swimming pools during the summer.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	ADDS											
PK_31	ADA-Mandated Inclusion Services													Recreation				N	This package requests $200K to cover previously unbudgeted current service levels. Inclusion Services is a mandated service, and demand continues to increase. PP&R has consistently increased funding, but demand continues to outpace appropriation levels.	PP&R will be able to sustainably include people who are living with disabilities into various recreation services.																												Y			INCLUDE	11	ADDS											
PK_32	Rx Play Continued Funding													Recreation				N	This package provides General Fund support for the formerly grant-funded pilot program RxPlay.  RxPlay is designed to create a bridge between medical advice encouraging regular physical activity and the community-based recreation systems which offer close-to-home physical activity opportunities for youth between the ages of 6 and 12 years.	More youth will have opportunities to experience and connect with physical activities they can enjoy throughout their lifetimes.																												Y			INCLUDE	12	ADDS											
PK_33	Saturday Youth Basketball													Recreation				N	"This package covers Portland Public School’s (PPS) custodial costs incurred when the PP&R Youth Basketball Program uses PPS school gyms on Saturdays. PPS can no longer cover custodial overtime costs associated with PP&R’s Saturday Youth Basketball program. PPS is requiring PP&R to cover half of the custodial costs in the current fiscal year and all of the expenses next fiscal year and thereafter.

This program, which runs for 8 weeks plus tournaments every winter, provides recreational and competitive basketball access for more than 3,000 youth every year.  In order to absorb this cost without additional funding, fees would have to be set prohibitively high."	Over 3,000 youth will be able to play basketball each year without having to pay increased fees.																												Y			INCLUDE	13	ADDS											
PK_34	Emergency Preparedness/Employee Safety													Support				N	This package requests a limited-term position to help the bureau address key compliance, legal, and training requirements and streamline safety and emergency management operations.	Employees may experience increased job satisfaction and perceive that they are safer in the workplace and that the bureau and city are well-positioned to handle an emergency.																												Y			INCLUDE	14	ADDS											
PK_35	Close Funding Gap for Summer Free for All													Recreation				N	If Council chooses to retain ongoing funding for Movies and Concerts, this package closes the gap between budgeted general fund support, estimated donations and sponsorships, and the true cost of offering over 100 free movies and concerts in the parks, along with summer playgrounds and USDA free summer lunch programs at more than 40 sites.  This is an ongoing funding need, not one time.	Thousands of Portlanders will continue to come together to enjoy free movies, concerts, playground programs, and lunches in their public parks, and PP&R will continue to leverage hundreds of thousands of dollars in private fundraising as well as more than one million dollars in in-kind promotions support.																												Y			INCLUDE	15	ADDS											
PK_36	Oaks Bottom Wildlife Refuge Complex Mgmt Plan													Support				N	This package funds development of a management plan for the heavily used complex of PP&R properties including Oaks Bottom Wildlife Refuge, Oaks Crossing, and Ross Island. This regional natural resource is easily accessible from southeast Portland and the Springwater Trail.	PP&R will be better prepared to sustainably manage this important natural resource while still providing many opportunities for Portlanders to connect with nature.																												Y			INCLUDE	16	ADDS											
PK_37	Automated Bathroom & Gate Lock-up													Infrastructure				N	This package implements a centrally-controlled, automated locking mechanism system for PP&R’s bathrooms that are today manually locked and installs automated gates at the sites where the most park users get locked in.	Automated locks would free up 8,000 hours of Ranger staff time for patrolling parks. Portlanders may experience feeling safer in parks with increased Ranger patrols.																												Y			INCLUDE	17	ADDS											
PK_38	Interstate Firehouse Cultural Center Support													Recreation				N	In order for IFCC to fulfill the vision of providing a multi-cultural performing arts venue, general fund support is needed to identify a sustainable programming approach.	This important cultural resource will remain open and available to provide arts experiences to the community.																												Y			INCLUDE	18	ADDS											
PK_39	O&M Funds for New Parks & Acquisitions													Infrastructure				N	"As the City and its population grow, so does the need for parks and green spaces. While the System Development Charges (SDC) program helps fund the acquisition and construction of new parks for the growing need, City Management Financial Policy 2.03.02 provides the City guidance on utilizing the growth in General Fund resources associated with a growing City to plan for the future maintenance of new assets.  

In accordance with Financial Policy 2.03, this decision package requests $220,954 of ongoing General Fund resources to support the estimated operations and maintenance costs of new park or park expansions expected to come to Council to be constructed in the upcoming year. They include:

Acq Columbia Edgewater - Bean Field ( 23.33 acres), $46,639
Acq Buoy One Property, Trail  (1.1 acres), $2,199
Acq Comroe Property, Forest Park (.17 acres), $340
Acq Foster Property, Forest Park (.17 acres), $340
Acq Port of Portland Property, Ross Island (2.5 acres), $4,998
Acq THEAST & SHEAST Property, Whitaker Ponds (.99 acres), $1,979
Acq Low Property, Woods Park (.36 acres), $720
Acq Leshgold Property, SW Terwilliger Park (.25 acres), $500
Acq Kirchhof Property, Marquam Park (.81 acres), $1,619
Acq Williams Property, Forest Park (1.01 acres), $2,019
Acq UofP Property, Forest Park (.14 acres), $280
Parklane Park Loo, $36,372
Wilkes Park Loo, $36,372
Fernhill Splash Pad, $43,289
Colonel Summers Park Splash Pad, $43,289
Subtotal FY16-17 O&M Requests, $220,954

"	PP&R will be able to sustainably operate and maintain park assets.																												Y			INCLUDE	23	ADDS											
PK_40	Position Authority for New Operations & Maint													Infrastructure				N	Over the years, PP&R has received CAL target adjustments for operating and maintaining new park assets that have been placed into service. These target adjustments added resources to the PP&R budget, but they did not provide budget authority to hire people to operate and maintain the new parks.	This package establishes position authority to hire those employees.																												Y			INCLUDE	24	ADDS											
PK_41	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$33,671 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from fund contingency and General Fund discretionary.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PK_42	Solar Panels at Soutwest Community Center																	N	The budget includes $182,000 in one-time General Fund resources to support solar installations at Southwest Community Center.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PK_43	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Rangers, Plans, New PDXers																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PK_44	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PK_45	Sheriff River Patrol																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PK_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_51	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_52	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_53	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_54	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_55	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_56	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_57	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_58	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_59	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_60	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_61	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_62	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_63	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_64	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_65	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_66	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_67	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_68	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_69	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_70	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_71	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_72	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_73	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_74	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PK_75	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL	Portland Police Bureau																	C																														Y			EXCLUDE													
PL_01	Recruitment Hiring & Staffing													Human Resources				N	"The bureau is in a period in which large numbers of sworn employees are eligible to retire. As of December 11, 2015, 101 of the bureau’s sworn members were retirement eligible. Over the five-year forecast, that number increases to nearly 300 sworn members, or approximately one-third of the bureau’s sworn staff. Over the ten-year forecast, more than 500 sworn members, or more than half of the bureau sworn staff, will be eligible for retirement. 

Assuming that the projected retirements and separations will occur, it will require the bureau to take a different approach to the business of hiring officers than past practice. Past practice has been to hire officers near or at the point vacancies occur, which effectively means that the bureau operates at a slight staffing deficit. Retirements have been relatively stable since 2010, averaging 26.86 annually over the past 24 years. Non-retirement separations have more variability than retirement separations, averaging 13 per year. The expectation of greater numbers of retirements over the five-year horizon means that the bureau needs to plan well in advance for the potential retirements and proactively recruit to have staffing available to fill future vacancies. 

Currently, the time it takes for an officer to apply for a job, go through the hiring and background processes, complete the state and the bureau academies, and receive appropriate training before an officer can work independently on the street, is approximately two years. That includes six months or more for the hiring and background processes, and eighteen months from the time that an officer is sworn in to the time they are independently assigned on the street.  With the recruitment, hiring, and training timeframes in mind, the bureau needs to conduct recruitments for projected sworn vacancies two years in advance of when the vacancies are likely to occur. Because the bureau is already in a sworn staffing deficit, the bureau would need to hire approximately 135 officers before June 30, 2016 who would then be ready to fill vacant officer positions on or before June 30, 2018.  The bureau would need to recruit 50 additional officers annually starting in FY 2016-17 moving forward to prepare candidates to fill the vacancies projected to occur two years later.  

One of the keys to success in filling bureau vacancies is having sufficient numbers of background investigators. Without adequate staffing, the background investigation process is a bottleneck in the bureau’s hiring process.  The background investigators conducted 513 civilian position (non-sworn positions, contractors, and volunteers) investigations in 2014, and 170 sworn position investigations in FY 2014-15.  Analysis shows that it will require 32 background investigators to accommodate the investigation workload to meet the bureau’s goal of hiring approximately 50 new officers annually, in addition to maintaining the ongoing workload generated by civilian position investigations.  The need to increase officer hiring is clear, but in order to do that, we need to ensure that the hiring pipeline is sized to move the candidates through. If we maintain the same background investigation process, we will need to increase the number of background investigators to conduct additional investigations to accommodate the increased workload resulting from the more frequent recruitments.  Analysis bears out the need for 32 background investigators to meet the hiring demands resulting from the projected vacancies, however the bureau is requesting 15 investigator positions and one supervisor position in this Requested Budget to establish the foundation of the background investigator unit. The bureau plans to assess the effectiveness of the unit at this level of staffing for one full year to determine the precise additional staffing needed.  
"	Increasing the number of background investigators will increase the number of investigations that can be completed in parallel.  The increase to 15 nonsworn investigators will have a favorable impact on the total number of officer candidates that can be screened.  The additional benefit is that four sworn officer positions will be reassigned to front line law enforcement duties, which immediately has a favorable impact on the staffing level crisis.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
PL_02	Sworn Officer Recruitment Incentives													Human Resources				N	"In addition to the length of time it takes to process its rigorous pre-hiring background investigations, the Portland Police Bureau is in competition with other cities on the west coast for applicants to become sworn officers in a shrinking pool of qualified individuals with an interest in a career in law enforcement.  Many of those agencies offer higher initial compensation and financial incentives.  The request for additional non-sworn background investigators would increase the number of candidates the bureau can screen, but there is a need to increase the number of qualified applicants, as well.  This decision package proposes two measures to increase the number of applicants with the use of financial incentives so that the bureau can more quickly resolve the ongoing succession and staffing crisis.

Portland brings in newly-hired sworn officers at an entry rate that is 22% lower than the rate paid at six months and nearly 30% less than the rate after one year on the job.  The comparatively low entry rate may be a substantial disincentive to prospective candidates that are applying with multiple agencies.  The first measure that the bureau proposes is for the entry rate to be raised to the six-month rate, to last for the first full year of employment.  The prospective cost of this change is $5,450 per newly-hired officer.  The minimum requirement is 40 successful new officer hires.  The bureau requests ongoing funding of $221,686 to support this starting pay rate increase.

As a second measure, the bureau proposes to increase the number of qualified applicants by funding one-time financial incentives, to be made available to the applicant upon swearing-in, for the new officer and a referring Police Bureau employee at the point the newly hired officer successfully completes the 18-month initial training and probation period.  A third payment would be made to the new officer upon completion of three years of service as a retention incentive. The hiring and referral incentives for qualified lateral sworn officers would be higher, to reflect the greater advantages associated with hiring experienced officers.  

The target officer hiring rate is 60 per year, consisting of 40 new plus 20 qualified lateral hires.  The payment stream for each hire would span a three-year period.  This generates a stair-step increase in the cost for the package from $100,000 in the first year, to $170,000 in the second year, to $240,000 in the third year, and to $480,000 in the fourth and future years.  The bureau requests ongoing funding be added to Current Appropriation Level in these increments from FY 2016-17 through FY 2019-20.

The Police Bureau and the Bureau of Human Resources are currently in discussion with the Portland Police Association regarding both of these incentive programs, which would be subject to bargaining under the terms of the labor agreement.


"	"Enhanced levels of employee referral plus a more attractive initial financial package for applicants are expected to increase both the quantity of applicants as well as the proportion that will succeed in hiring and training.  The measures and targets of success will be an increase in the number of applicants, doubling the proportion that qualify for an offer of hire, and meeting a threshold of 60 new hires per year.  The bureau expects that elements of this incentive package will have a favorable impact on attracting a pool of applicants that is more diverse than the current composition of the bureau.
"	PL_0010																											Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
PL_03	Neighborhood Response Team Staffing													Neighborhood Safety				N	"Each of the bureau’s three precincts operates a dedicated Neighborhood Response Team to focus on the specific livability issues in their respective geographic area. The three NRT teams handle nearly 15,000 incidents annually, including arrests and citations, distressed properties, nuisance locations, business outreach, trespass agreements, and transient camp mitigation. One of the most visible services that is performed by the NRTs is focusing on neighborhood problem locations, often single properties that are the nexus for drug use, drug dealing, criminal activity, and illegal occupation.   The NRT Officers work through the various legal and procedural options to mitigate the problem location, which can take more than a year of efforts.  

In response to escalating gang violence in 2015, the bureau reassigned six NRT positions to the Gang Enforcement Team , which ceased to perform NRT livability work.  The bureau has subsequently had to re-direct Police Officers in the remaining NRT positions to precinct patrol duties on a sporadic basis, due to staffing shortages in that core function.  The reassignment of the NRT team members has meant that community livability issues will not be addressed with the same level of continuity unless the problem is significant and chronic.  Some of the problems may be addressed as officers are able to fit that work into their daily patrol work, but the complex, longer-term neighborhood livability cases will not receive a priority due to the shortage of sworn staffing resources.

The bureau requests the addition of six NRT Police Officer positions in the FY 2016-17 Requested Budget, which would allow a portion of the NRT work to resume.  This would not restore the service levels to what they were prior to the bureau’s staffing crisis, but it would allow the bureau to provide a higher level of service in the meantime.       

"	The addition of six NRT officer positions will increase the capacity of the bureau to focus on livability issues in partnership with members of the local communities which experience those problems.																												Y			INCLUDE	08	ADDS											
PL_04	Internal Affairs Investigators and Admin Support													Employee Performance				N	"The U.S. Department of Justice Settlement Agreement with the City of Portland has created a substantial body of work for the Police Bureau to comply with its requirements.  City Council has increased the bureau’s staff by 23 positions to manage this body of work so far.  Additional positions have also been added within the City Auditor and City Attorney’s Offices.  There are likely to be increasing demands as the Compliance Officer/ Community Liaison (COCL) and DOJ begin to focus more directly and intently on the City’s progress with the various aspects of the Agreement.  

The City’s Independent Police Review (IPR) Division and Citizen Review Committee are tasked to accept and investigate citizen allegations of misconduct including excessive use of force by sworn members of the Police Bureau.  Cases that it finds rise to the level of violation of bureau policy are forwarded for investigation by the Police Bureau’s Internal Affairs Division (IAD).  The DOJ and COCL have focused on the proportion of cases that IPR forwards to IAD, which they find to be lower than expected under the terms of the Agreement.  The DOJ Agreement raises the criteria to “clear and convincing evidence to IPR that the allegation has no basis in fact” for IPR to not sustain the complaint in an investigation or a complaint.  Because this is an extremely high threshold, there will be a substantial increase in the proportion of cases IPR will sustain and forward to IAD for investigation: the number may double.

In order to meet the City’s requirement to resolve such investigations within 180 days of the lodging of the complaint with IPR, the bureau has included a request for additional non-sworn staff to effectively manage the increased workload within the 180 day timeline mandated by the DOJ Agreement.  The request is for two non-sworn Police Internal Affairs Investigator positions and one non-sworn administrative staff position.  

"	The measure of effectiveness will be managing the increased volume of investigations in compliance with the 180 timeline for resolution of each case.																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
PL_05	Sexual Assault Team Staffing													Investigations				N	"The bureau’s Sex Crime Unit (SCU) actively investigates approximately 500 sexual assaults annually.  The unit currently processes less than half of the sexual assault kits (SAKs) resulting from those cases that it takes into evidence, annually.  The current national movement is underway to mandate testing of all SAKs, and states across the nation are enacting legislation that supports this movement.  The Police Bureau’s approach to sexual assault cases is a progressive national model as the investigations and services are victims-centered and advocate-based.  This approach results in greater victim cooperation and increased levels of incarceration of perpetrators, but the process also requires significantly more staff resources to accomplish the increase in workload to process 100% of SAKs.  

A recent audit conducted by the City Auditor identified greater than 3,800 SAKs in the bureau’s possession with 1,700 of them being untested sexual assault kits (USAKs).  To address the bureau’s priority of testing the USAKs, the bureau has secured a three-year grant to test the backlog, which will now provide victims of sex assault the opportunity to pursue justice. The work related to the cases in which there are USAKs is distinctly different than that of the current sexual assault cases, and as such, will be treated by the SCU as two distinct bodies of work.  The bureau still needs additional bandwidth to keep up with new sexual assault cases. Each of the nine Sexual Assault Detail Detectives, at the current case intake rate, maintains a caseload of 25 to 30 cases, which is double the caseload standard per Detective.  The unit currently has one advocate dedicated to assist nine Detectives, an arrangement that does not meet the bureau’s standard to have an advocate present at every victims’ interview and available as a resource for every victim of sexual assault. The bureau is requesting two additional Detectives and one advocate position assigned to the Sexual Assault Detail to meet the bureau’s commitment to test all SAKs within a reasonable timeframe.  Additionally, at the time when the grant is ending, the bureau will submit a request for three additional advocate positions to achieve this new approach to sexual assault cases.

"	This will allow testing of all SAKs and assignment of a greater number of sexual assault cases to Police Detectives.  It will also provide an increased level of victims advocacy serices.  The addition of these positions may improve the case closure rate for person crimes overall.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
PL_06	Refugee Community Engagement Program													Citizen Partnership				N	"The bureau is looking to the Minneapolis model of police outreach community liaisons to develop the beginning of a community engagement team.  A primary goal of the community engagement effort is to provide better service levels to communities that historically have not experienced positive and collaborative relationships with their local law enforcement, but are experiencing internal public safety and crime issues.  The Minneapolis team has liaisons to different cultural communities, including Somali, Hispanic, African-American, and Asian communities. The department is now expanding the team to include female liaisons to these communities as well, in order to establish even greater partnerships and make further inroads into these communities.  The Police Bureau has recognized a need to proactively and preemptively engage with the continuously growing refugee/immigrant community that is settling in the Portland Metro area. In the last 15 years approximately 30,000 war refugees from Somalia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Congo, Chad, and other African countries have settled in the Portland Metro area. The Portland Police Bureau has identified that a community liaison to the Somali community would be the first priority in establishing a liaison program in Portland, as the Somali population is one of the largest immigrant populations in the Portland area. To illustrate the growth in the community, in 1990 Somalis comprised 2% of the African immigrants in Multnomah County, and by 2007 Somalis comprised 29% of the African immigrants in Multnomah County. Of the more than 90,000 Somali immigrants have come to the United States and of those 8,000 have settled in Portland. The Somali-speaking student population within Portland Public School (PPS) District schools has grown by 32% over two fiscal years and they are the third largest English-second language group in the PPS district.  

It is of paramount importance for the bureau to develop a long-term Refugee Community Engagement Program. The program entails creating a new Community Liaison position that would partner with a sworn officer, and serve as bridge between the immigrant communities and the bureau. The program aims to increase trust and communication between the police and the refugee communities including some of the specific activities:
•	Develop an enhanced integration strategy (crime prevention workshops; orientation for  newly arrived refugees; youth, elder; and women forums; and community and religious leaders roundtable meetings)
•	Create and provide cultural awareness training for Portland Police Officers
•	Create and provide multicultural/multilingual training materials for Police Officers
•	Develop a series of training videos about the criminal justice system for refugee community 

This model of Police Officers working in tandem with focused community liaisons promotes effective community policing.  Outreach efforts would focus on vulnerable refugee communities that otherwise would remain marginalized and isolated. The bureau is requesting one community outreach liaison position in the FY 2016-17 budget and will evaluate the effectiveness of the position to determine future requests for expanding the program.

"	The goal of this community engagement effort is to provide better service levels to one of the communities that historically has not experienced positive and collaborative relationships with their local law enforcement, but which is  experiencing internal public safety and crime issues.  The addition of this position may address a need to proactively and preemptively engage with a significant, growing refugee/immigrant community that is settling in the Portland Metro area.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	ADDS											
PL_07	Public Records Request Staff													Data Access				N	"The bureau’s Records Division is responsible for responding to public records requests.  There is an increased level of time and effort associated with generating the responses from RegJIN compared to the predecessor records management system.  There is also an upward trend in the volume of requests.  This has caused the bureau to generate an increasing backlog of requests that await responses.  

The bureau requests the addition of a non-sworn position dedicated to processing public records requests, to be funded with cost recovery revenue associated with the program.      

"	The effectiveness of this measure will be a substantial decrease in the backlog in the short term, and in the long term maintaining a quick response to requests and a backlog of less than 10 days for most requests.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	ADDS											
PL_08	Equity & Diversity Program Specialist													Human Resources				N	"The bureau requests addition of an Equity and Diversity Program Specialist position to be dedicated to assisting the Equity and Diversity Program Manager in the implementation of the bureau’s strategic equity plan.  It is a robust plan that impacts all areas of the bureau’s ongoing organizational, training, hiring, and policy development.  The implementation plan will include strategies such as: curriculum review and development; development and institutionalization of a recruitment plan and data tracking processes; strengthening of the promotional track; policy gap analysis; training and implementation of an equity lens; development of youth and bureau advisory structures; and, the exploration and strengthening of leadership development within the bureau. It includes a built-in evaluation plan to assess the effectiveness of the strategies implemented.   

"	The equity and diversity program specialist position will assist in moving the work forward with the sense of urgency that is required for success.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
PL_09	Non-sworn Fleet Coordinator													Human Resources				N	"The bureau requests the addition of one non-sworn position to perform the work of the Fleet Coordinator.  The Fleet Coordinator supports the bureau in oversight of the police vehicle budget, specification writing, and the oversight of repair, maintenance and replacement of new and used vehicles and related equipment.  This position is the point of contact for issues related to purchasing, up fitting and disposing of the bureau's 700 vehicle fleet.  The position is also the liaison between the bureau and City Fleet and ComNet and is the bureau’s point of contact for outside vendors on fleet-related products. 

This position was eliminated in a FY 2011-12 budget reduction, but the necessary body of work was subsequently performed by a Police Officer.  With the sworn staffing crisis, all sworn members are needed to work the core patrol and investigative functions of the bureau. Additionally an independent staffing study conducted in 2014 recommended that this position become a civilian position which comports with the bureau’s desire to move sworn members who are performing civilian jobs to patrol.   

"	This will allow the bureau to deploy a Police Officer to front-line law enforcement, which will assist in addressing the sworn staffing level crisis.  It will allow the bureau to hire a nonsworn employee with expertise in fleet management to fulfill the bureau's requirements.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
PL_10	Body-worn Camera Program													Strategy & Finance				N	"The bureau has considered the purchase and implementation of body-worn camera technology since FY 2013-14, at which time the bureau had determined it would be more beneficial to implement body-worn cameras rather than expand the pilot in-car video system. Council approved the allocation of $834,000 of one-time funding for the bureau to purchase the equipment, but has not yet provided the commitment of ongoing funding, which is significant. The bureau is awaiting the commitment of ongoing funding to proceed with making the investment of time and resources to develop a body-worn camera program.  In this Requested Budget, the bureau requests ongoing funding and 2.00 FTE to support the program.  Many of the logistical roadblocks to program implementation were eliminated in FY 2015-16 and these include enactment of new state law governing the terms of body-worn video technology use, conversations with partner agencies who will be affected by the program, and the technology research and familiarity needed to proceed with a successful RFP process. 

If Council approves the bureau’s ongoing request for funding, the bureau would initiate a phased-in implementation of the program beginning in July 2016. The phases would include an initial phase of the infrastructure development and a one-division pilot, phase two would entail implementation within a precinct, and the third and final phase would be implementation of the rest of the bureau. The three phases would span two fiscal years through FY 2017-18, after which time, the program would enter the sustainment status.



"	For multiple reasons including accountability, transparency, and legitimacy, the bureau is supportive of implementing body-worn camera technology. The potential benefits of implementing a body-worn camera technology include greater public trust, swifter adjudication of cases, fewer false claims against police, financial benefit of fewer payouts of claims, decreased hostile interactions between police and the public, and officer self-improvement and training tools. The law enforcement field has embraced officer video/audio technology in the wake of national anti-police protests that have demanded greater transparency and accountability of local police agencies, as one of the few ways to derive more accurate and impartial accounts of events that occur between the police and the public.  Orlando, Florida; Rialto, California; and Mesa and Tucson, Arizona, all comparable law enforcement agencies to Portland, have implemented body-worn camera systems and have experienced in the range of 40% decrease in overall complaints against Police and a 60% to 75% decrease in use of force complaints. Portland Police Bureau anticipates measurable benefit in many of these areas, some in the short term, others only appreciable over a long term.																												Y			INCLUDE	11	ADDS											
PL_11	Non-sworn Complaint Signers													Investigations				N	"The Police Bureau must sign and file a criminal complaint with the courts as a required element of charging individuals with crimes.  The bureau has staffed this function with sworn officers that were serving in a limited-duty capacity.  Most of the officers serving in that capacity have been separated from the bureau, which has created a shortage within this critical function.  The bureau has determined that there is a significant advantage to using civilian employees in the role of complaint signer.  There is no requirement that complaint signers be sworn, and staffing the positions with non-sworn employees allows the bureau to assign sworn officers to perform duties that require them.  

The bureau requests two non-sworn FTE and ongoing funding to perform this function.

"	This solution meets the need to staff the complaint signer function while providing greater flexibility to assign sworn members of the bureau to core patrol and investigative functions. This will assist with addressing the sworn staffing shortage crisis.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	ADDS											
PL_12	Family Services Reduction													Cycle of Violence				N	"The Mayor’s budget guidance instructed General Fund bureaus to include reductions of 5% from their FY 2016-17 Current Appropriation Level targets. This is to allow the Mayor to determine if there are budget realignments that should be made within bureaus and between bureaus to fund the Council priorities of response to the housing and homelessness crisis; the preservation of core public safety functions to respond to the epidemic of gun-related violence and to proactively engage with the community; as well as other City needs. The following reductions to specialty units will be highly detrimental to the service delivery capacity of the bureau, but preserve the bureau’s core emergency response and investigative functions.

This package eliminates all of the Family Services Division, with the exception of the Child Abuse Team, which would be relocated to the Detective Division. The elimination of the Family Services Team eliminates the Domestic Violence units including the Violations of Restraining Order Team and Gun Dispossession; WomenStrength, GirlStrength, and BoyStrength programs; and the Elder Crimes Unit. The changes to the services to the public resulting from the elimination of the Domestic Violence teams include fewer resources to investigate domestic violence cases and cases related to violations of restraining orders and domestic violence, elimination of resources targeted to remove guns from violent offenders, and the elimination of support for victims of domestic violence with immediate welfare and safety needs. The service to the public that would cease to be provided with the elimination of the Strength programs include targeted teaching, supporting and fostering awareness for violence and abuse prevention strategies, dealing with attacks through self-defense, and building confidence. The services to the public that would cease with the elimination of the Elder and Vulnerable Adult Unit include the investigations of elder-related and vulnerable adult crime including abuse and neglect as well as robbery, theft, and various kinds of fraud. 

"	"The changes to the services to the public resulting from the elimination of the Domestic Violence teams include fewer resources to investigate domestic violence cases and cases related to violations of restraining orders and domestic violence, elimination of resources targeted to remove guns from violent offenders, and the elimination of support for victims of domestic violence with immediate welfare and safety needs. The service to the public that would cease to be provided with the elimination of the Strength programs include targeted teaching, supporting and fostering awareness for violence and abuse prevention strategies, dealing with attacks through self-defense, and building confidence. The services to the public that would cease with the elimination of the Elder and Vulnerable Adult Unit include the investigations of elder-related and vulnerable adult crime including abuse and neglect as well as robbery, theft, and various kinds of fraud. Because there will be additional response and investigative follow-up responsibility placed on precinct patrol, it is anticipated that dispatched call load will increase, self-initiated call load will decrease, and there will be a negative impact to person crimes case closure rates.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
PL_13	Youth Services Division Reduction													Neighborhood Safety				N	"The Mayor’s budget guidance instructed General Fund bureaus to include reductions of 5% from their FY 2016-17 Current Appropriation Level targets. This is to allow the Mayor to determine if there are budget realignments that should be made within bureaus and between bureaus to fund the Council priorities of response to the housing and homelessness crisis; the preservation of core public safety functions to respond to the epidemic of gun-related violence and to proactively engage with the community; as well as other City needs. The following reductions to specialty units will be highly detrimental to the service delivery capacity of the bureau, but preserve the bureau’s core emergency response and investigative functions.

This package eliminates all of the Youth Services Division, with the exception of the Crisis Response Team, and Reserve and Cadet Officer programs.   The elimination of the Youth Services Division eliminates the Gang Resistance Education And Training (G.R.E.A.T.) Program, Runaway Juvenile Investigations, and School Resource Officers (SROs). The mission of Youth Services Division and the SROs is to improve safety in the schools, increase the graduation rate of vulnerable youth and keep them out of the criminal justice system.  
"	"The services to the public that would cease with the elimination of the G.R.E.A.T. program include officer-led instruction of curriculum designed to educate students on gangs and violence, being a member of a community, effective communication, and conflict resolution, to more than 2,000 elementary and middle school students. Also lost would be the extensive partnerships developed with local organizations to achieve the G.R.E.A.T. program goals to keep youth out of criminal justice system by teaching focused curriculum in the community and in schools.  The services to the public that would cease with the elimination of the Runaway Juvenile Investigations Unit are follow-up and investigative support for juvenile runaway cases.  The services to the public that would cease with the elimination of the School Police Unit include recruiting, training, supervising, supporting and scheduling school crossing guards; providing a summer sports camp for more than 500 low-income youth ages 8-14; responding to 6,100 school campus-area calls for service annually; providing a law enforcement presence and expertise at school locations in the Portland area school districts, and supporting the school systems with assistance on events, programs, and student academies. The elimination of School Police would place responsibility for response on precinct patrol, which may increase the level of dispatched calls for service and decrease the level of self-initiated calls.  


"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
PL_14	Traffic Division Reduction													Traffic Safety				N	"The Mayor’s budget guidance instructed General Fund bureaus to include reductions of 5% from their FY 2016-17 Current Appropriation Level targets. This is to allow the Mayor to determine if there are budget realignments that should be made within bureaus and between bureaus to fund the Council priorities of response to the housing and homelessness crisis; the preservation of core public safety functions to respond to the epidemic of gun-related violence and to proactively engage with the community; as well as other City needs. The following reductions to specialty units will be highly detrimental to the service delivery capacity of the bureau, but preserve the bureau’s core emergency response and investigative functions.

The Traffic Division would be eliminated, including the photo radar and red light camera enforcement programs.  Primary responsibility for traffic safety will be assumed by precinct patrol.  The Canine and Emergency Management Unit will be transferred to other divisions within the bureau.  The bureau's major crash investigation team would become a detatched assignment.  Motorcycle officers would be deployed among the precincts as part of normal patrol operations.

"	"The elimination of this specialty unit will have several negative impacts on the bureau’s capabilities.  The division performs focused, high-visibility and grant-funded traffic safety enforcement missions that would not otherwise be performed.  The Traffic Division issues roughly 80,000 traffic citations each year, which is 94% of all Portland traffic citations, which would not otherwise be issued.  Traffic officers are the primary responders to DUII cases, and their targeted missions interdict roughly 80% of DUII offenders that would not otherwise be stopped.  Their familiarity with the complex on-scene process involved with DUII stops makes them substantially more efficient than most patrol officers.  Roughly 4,700 additional hours of precinct officer time would be spent processing the 20% of remaining DUII cases.  The major crash investigations team would become a detached assignment of officers assigned to regular duties in core functions.  The sworn staff required to issue citations of the red light camera program and photo radar speed enforcement program would be eliminated and those programs discontinued and more than 38,000 annual citations would no longer be issued.  Motorcycle officers would be dispersed to precinct patrol duties.  Coordination and availability of their operation for dignitary protection and special events would be significantly reduced.  Grant funding for traffic safety enforcement would no longer be available because it is predicated on the bureau having a dedicated traffic safety division.  Because of the elimination of the focused patrol and enforcement provided by the Traffic Division, the impacts of cutting the division is anticipated to increase the number of traffic collisions, number of driving while impaired and/or distracted, and number of traffic accident fatalities.  The bureau was already anticipating negative impacts on traffic safety resulting from the legalization of marijuana in the State of Oregon based on the State of Colorado’s experience with recreational marijuana legalization. In Colorado, in the first year that retail Marijuana was legalized, there was a 32% increase in marijuana-related traffic deaths, and marijuana-related traffic deaths increased from 10% to 20% of all traffic deaths.   There has already been one marijuana-related traffic death in Portland in 2016.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
PL_15	CIP: Justice Center Elevators													Strategy & Finance				N	"The Justice Center, located at 1111 SW 2nd Ave, is served by three elevators.  The assets were installed in 1983 and serve 300 plus Police employees within the building.  The three elevators are frequently and sporadically out of service, have multiple entrapments each week, pose health and safety risks to building residents.  One employee had to be extracted by PF&R, hauled up the shaft on a rope.  The existing assets are obsolete, making repair difficult, expensive, and often impossible.


The Portland Police Bureau has over 300 employees operating out of the Justice Center located at 1111 SW 2nd Ave.  Employee duties range widely within the building from drug and homicide investigations to forensics, finance and administration, and day to day patrol operations.   Additionally, the building hosts many public meetings attended by many different community groups, media, outside agencies, and other City employees.  Police employees, the majority of which are first responders, and visitors rely heavily on the building's three public elevators, which were installed in November 1983.  The three public elevators are traction elevators, one of which is a large service elevator.  Since their initial installation, the control boards have been updated once, in February 2006.  The assets’ hardware has never been updated.  

The Police Bureau has employed many different repair strategies to address the ongoing issues, but because the control boards and other key components of the elevators are now obsolete, repairs are expensive, frustrating, and often impossible for the contractor to effect.


"	Replacement of the elevators in the Justice Center would eliminate an unreliable system that has health and safety risks as well as legal and financial liability risks.																												Y			INCLUDE	12	ADDS											
PL_16	Fair Wage Adjustment																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_17	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$222,987 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded with new General Fund Discretionary
$398,037 is added to the bureau budget to fund debt service for fueling station infrastructure improvements. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. There is not net change in cost."																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_18	Records Specialist Wage Adjustments																	N																														Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_19	FY 2015-16 Carryover: Body Cams, Fleet, M&S																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_20	Radio Replacement Set-Aside																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_21	Police Staffing																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PL_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_51	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_52	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_53	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_54	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_55	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_56	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_57	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_58	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_59	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PL_60	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN	Bureau of Planning																	C																																														
PN_01	Complete Single-Dwelling Development Code Projec													Code Development				N	"In FY15-16, the bureau started a project to respond to three issues related to recent concerns about the scale of in-fill housing in single-dwelling zones. This often is from infill development that involves demolition of existing houses or development on previously undeveloped lots created by property line adjustments and historically platted narrow/small lots. 

Since demand for housing in Portland single-dwelling neighborhoods will continue to grow, it is important to examine how the development rules can mediate these conflicts while increasing the options for households to find housing in these neighborhoods. The Single-Dwelling Development Code Project is intended to address these issues.

1.	How to better ensure compatible infill through zoning code provisions that affect scale and design of new single-family dwellings such as (a) use of floor area ratios, (b) lot coverage, (b) height, (c) setbacks and (d) required rear yard area.
2.	How to better ensure compatible infill through new regulations controlling infill development on “skinny” lots. 
3.	How to increase the types, sizes, cost, site design and density of units allowed in single-dwelling zones. This is to make high opportunity neighborhoods more accessible to a wider range of income households. This includes allowing flexibility that encourages innovative housing types and development. 

When begun, the project was intended to be complete in the first quarter of 2017. The project has now been broken into two phases.  Phase One will be complete by December 2016 and will include adoption of code changes related to Topic #1 above.  Phase Two will be complete by December 2017 and will cover the other two Topics.
"	"1.	Adoption of zoning code amendments for Topic #1 - the scale of infill houses.
2.	Completion of Discussion Draft on code amendments for Topics #2 and #3.
3.	Public hearing and adoption process for topics #2 and #3 continues into FY17-18.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
PN_02	"Completion of New Comprehensive Plan	"													Comprehensive Planning				N	"In FY16-17, City Council is expected to adopt the new Comprehensive Plan policies, land use map, capital project list and supporting documents. This package will then be submitted to the State Department of Land Conservation and Development. Also later in FY16-17, City Council is expected to approve the first set of code and zoning map changes needed to implement the new Comprehensive Plan. With submittal of these deliverables, the City will have completed its submissions to satisfy State Periodic Review requirements. 

This add-package would provide:
•	Funding to continue the lead staff for outreach and public involvement (0.55 FTE). 
•	Funding to continue the project’s public information call center. 
•	Funding to pay for required public notices. 
•	Funding for PBOT work to complete adoption of the Transportation System Plan and implementing code changes. 
"	"Deliverables: 
1.	Adopted Comprehensive Plan and support documents
2.	Public process to review and adopted code and map changes to implement the new Comprehensive Plan and satisfy State Periodic Review requirements


"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
PN_03	"Design Overlay Zone Assessment — Implementation	"													Code Development				N	"Starting in FY15-16, the bureau with BDS is undertaking an assessment of the City design review system. The assessment will be performed by an independent consultant team. Contract and project management will be provided by BPS. Work on the assessment is expected to be complete in December 2016.

Following the assessment, BPS needs to undertake several projects to implement the assessment’s recommendations and to otherwise improve the design review system including: 

1.	The assessment may recommend changes to the design review process and commission structure that require legislative changes to the Zoning Code to implement.

2.	The bureau will initiate an 18-month project to update the community design standards — a core tool of the design review system. These standards are used as part of the non-discretionary review process for projects outside the Central City. This work will be partially supported by an Intergovernmental Agreement with BDS.

3.	The bureau and BDS also have identified a critical need to update the Central City Fundamental guidelines. These are the core guidelines used by the Design Commission and BDS staff in their review of Central City development projects. In FY16-17, the bureau hopes to initiate a project that will continue with additional funding in FY17-18.

These three projects have been identified as key actions to implement the new Comprehensive Plan and the CC2035 Plan. The public has demanded that the quality of new development in fast growing centers and corridors be more reliably of high quality. This is seen as essential for successful growth. Expanding design review may be a way to meet this objective. However, expanding the system to cover centers and corridors will not succeed without improvements to the design review system and tools. 

Design review in the Central City can have even more impact, both positive and negative. Design review in the Central City allows more discretion by the Design Review Commission and its staff. For years now, major weaknesses have been identified, by both BDS and BPS, in the current guidelines. If these are not improved, the design review process cannot reliably deliver expected results in terms of design quality and in the cost effectiveness and efficiency of the design review process. 

The expected pace of development in the next years has made the projects described above priorities for FY16-17.




This add-package would provide:
•	Funding to adequately staff work on the Community Design Standards. 
•	Funding to initiate work on the Central City Fundamental Guidelines — develop scope of work and budget. 
•	Funding to support any legislative code changes needed for implementation of the design review assessment.
"	"
1.	Adoption of code changes based on Design Review Assessment
2.	Scoping, budget, and initiation of Community Design Standards update and Central City Fundamental Design Guidelines update.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
PN_04	Transit Corridor Development and CC2035 Planning													Comp Plan & Central City				N	"This package would cut staff positions and contract funds. Both of these positions weaken important bureau functions. Loss of the positions also is a set-back for the shift the bureau needs to accomplish from a work plan dominated by preparing long-range plans to one that implements those plans. 

The work linking transportation and land use has been core to Portland’s planning success. To implement the Comprehensive Plan, the bureau needs to strengthen its leadership and technical abilities related to the multi-bureau community development strategies that are critical to successful transit corridors development.  

By success we mean:
•	having low income households and communities of color share in the benefits of the transit development equitably; 
•	addressing affordable housing and economic development needs; 
•	providing for effective community involvement and leadership in how the corridor develops; 
•	making sure the land use and urban design on the corridor produce development that meets goals for complete communities; and 
•	making sure value capture strategies are used to help pay for the community development efforts.

To meet the requested 5% cut, the bureau believes it must cut a Program Coordinator position that was intended for a new dedicated bureau lead for coordination among land use, development, transportation and transit planning.  Specifically, this position would guide the work of other line staff on new transit corridors such as Powell/Division and SW Barbur and redevelopment along civic corridors such as 82nd Avenue. The elimination of this position will reduce the amount and depth of this work. The responsibilities will no longer have a lead staff and will be divided among other project staff.  

This package also cuts a City Planner I position that is important for completion of the Central City 2035 (CC2035) Plan and for continued Central City planning after CC2035. Two positions in the CC2035 team are limited term positions that will not be funded in FY16-17. The loss of these two positions was to be offset by filling the City Planner I position. To ensure timely completion of CC2035, staff from other programs could be assigned temporarily to the CC2035 team. This, however, would cause delay in other bureau projects.

Upon completion of the CC2035 Plan, BPS has intended to return to core Central City Planning program staffing of three FTE, two Senior Planners and the potentially cut City Planner I position. Loss of this position will leave the Central City Planning program short staffed into the future.
"	Eliminating the Program Coordinator position will reduce coordination among land use, development, transportation and transit planning. These responsibilities will no longer have a lead staff and will be divided among other project staff.  Specific impacts will likely be evident in work on new transit corridors such as Powell/Division and SW Barbur and redevelopment along civic corridors such as 82nd Avenue. Cutting the City Planner I position will result in temporarily reassigning staff from other programs to the Central City team. This, however, would cause delay in other bureau projects, such as code changes related to emergency shelters and schools.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
PN_05	Demographic and Housing Research													General Planning				N	"This cut would eliminate a Management Analyst position that has been the bureau lead for demographic and housing related research. The elimination of this position will restrict our ability to support requests for demography analysis and how Portland is changing.  The burden of those requests will fall to other staff and will result in delayed response; alternatively, it may impact project budgets because work needs to shift to consultants.  BPS will lose a level of expertise and understanding of the data sets and that will limit our ability to respond to an increasing number of requests for data from PSC and City Council as they make their recommendations and decisions. 

The types of analysis that has been supported by this position include: housing impact, gentrification vulnerability, Title VI Limited English Proficiency analysis; development permit reporting to Census and PSU Population Research Center; and several projects related to getting accurate counts for Portland in the 2020 census.

The Bureau’s demographer has led a pilot project estimating community-validated count and location mapping for Portland’s Somali population. As Portland continues to diversify, such studies will help advance equity through better understanding of actual population count and population and housing characteristics of this community, but this can be applied to other small populations like the Hmong, the Ukrainians or the Romanian communities. 
"	The elimination of this position will restrict our ability to support requests for demography analysis and how Portland is changing.  The burden of those requests will fall to other staff that can do the work, but may not be as capable and will result in delayed response; alternatively, it may impact project budgets because work needs to shift to consultant.  BPS will lose a level of expertise and understanding of the data sets that will limit our ability to respond to an increasing number of requests for data from PSC and City Council as they make their recommendations and decisions.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
PN_06	Sustainability													Sustainability				N	This package reduces staffing for BPS sustainability programs, slowing the implementation of the Climate Action Plan and Climate Change Preparation Strategy and reducing capacity to respond to new opportunities, such as grant solicitations. The cut also shifts some core program management staff (0.1 FTE) to grants, delaying immediate impacts but creating the potential for future volatility.	This package reduces staffing for BPS sustainability programs, slowing the implementation of the Climate Action Plan and Climate Change Preparation Strategy and reducing capacity to respond to new opportunities, such as grant solicitations. Examples of impacted program areas include implementing the City’s new electric vehicle strategy, currently in development, and community solar efforts.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
PN_07	Smart Cities													Technical Services				N	"Emerging technologies are creating new ways to use the wealth of urban data to inform key decisions, to improve delivery of city services, and to address City goals around transportation, equity, public health, economic opportunity, community engagement and carbon emissions. Multiple bureaus, including BPS, Technology Services, the Office of Community Technology, Transportation and PDC have been involved in initial “smart city” projects to apply these new approaches to long-standing City priorities. The Comprehensive Plan Map App, for example, has been a key public engagement tool, providing detailed information to and fielding thousands of comments from Portlanders. Of significant note, residents commenting through the Map App have been much more geographically representative than conventional forms of input. Additionally, many private-sector firms, from the largest tech firms to local startups, have approached City bureaus about potential partnerships, and Portland State University (PSU) is also actively developing opportunities connected to City functions and priorities. And, federal agencies are now directing significant funding toward smart city initiatives, such as the $40 million “Smart City Challenge” launched by USDOT in late 2015.

To coordinate effectively across bureaus and build partnerships among public, private, and academic institutions requires dedicated staffing. City staff already participate in several national smart city networks and initiatives, including the MetroLab Network, Envision America, and the Global City Team Challenge, but connecting the opportunities emerging from these networks to relevant bureaus requires much greater communication and coordination. Similarly, the City has already entered into an MOU with PSU as part of the MetroLab Network, and this position will enable the City to make the most of this partnership. The City will also benefit from establishing a smart city strategy that articulates priorities, clarifies roles among bureaus, and identifies focus areas and goals. Central among these priorities is equity, which is not routinely evident in smart cities projects in many cities. 

A current project on SE Powell-Division illustrates the potential of a Portland smart cities initiative. This project will link sophisticated transportation data with demographic analysis and new, affordable air quality sensors. In tandem with the transit improvements proposed to the corridor, the project seeks to improve personal mobility, reduce exposure to air pollution, cut carbon emissions, increase adoption of broadband and wireless technology, and improve economic opportunity and quality of life through access to better healthcare and education. 

State and federal resources to address urban livability and equity issues are scarce, and the City needs to pursue private sector funds and competitive grants to address structural imbalances in service provision and innovation. The Smart Cities arena is a significant opportunity to bring new approaches, technologies and resources to bear on persistent challenges.

In FY16-17, the Program Coordinator funded by this decision package will:
•	Coordinate City-related smart city efforts across bureaus, other public agencies, private sector firms and universities.
•	Develop shared vision, strategic priorities and implementation projects for the City.
•	Identify funding opportunities and coordinate resource development across bureaus and external partners.
•	Track emerging project opportunities.
•	Participate in local and national networks of smart city practitioners to bring successful technologies and concepts to Portland.
"	"Deliverables: 
1.	Portland Smart Cities strategic initiative
2.	Coordination of at least two pilot projects in partnership with other bureaus
3.	Establishing City best practices for work with cellular providers for consideration by PBOT and other operational bureaus.
4.	At least two proposals for external funding or significant partnership
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
PN_08	Public Trash Can Expansion													Solid Waste & Reduction				N	"BPS currently provides public place garbage collection for 600 garbage cans in seven business districts at an annual cost of about $400,000. 

This decision package would extend public place garbage collection to 24 additional business districts throughout the city. In FY16-17, service would expand to five new areas, with a similar phased expansion in each of the following four years. The total expansion will add approximately 825 additional garbage cans in 24 new service districts. 

As Portland adds population and commercial activity, the city’s neighborhood business districts will experience growing volumes of pedestrians, and public trash cans will become more important to ensuring clean, inviting sidewalks. Public trash cans are currently available inconsistently around the city, with BPS providing service in seven districts, another six providing service themselves, and many others having no service at all. This decision package will expand service to all business districts designated in the new Comprehensive Plan as Regional Centers, Town Centers and Neighborhood Centers.

The total estimated cost for purchasing and installing new cans over five years is $500,000. Annual operating costs for providing collection service, maintenance and repair of the cans for the entire public can program, including currently existing cans, are estimated at $1.1 million after full implementation. This includes 1 additional FTE to manage the program expansion and coordinate on-going program operations. 

Funding this expansion will require two increases of the tonnage fee on commercial solid waste. In FY16-17 the fee would increase by $1.30 per ton, from the current level of $8.30 per ton to $9.60 per ton. An additional increase of $1.30 per ton will be necessary in FY19-20. 
"	"1.	Public trash collection provided in all 31 Comprehensive Plan-designated Regional Centers, Town Centers, and Neighborhood Centers.
2.	Equitable allocation of City resources for keeping neighborhood business districts clean.
3.	Improved community experience of neighborhood business districts (measured through BPS performance metrics of “Percentage of residents rating livability ‘Good’ or ‘Very Good’” and “Overall city livability: Percentage of respondents rating ‘Good’ or ‘Very Good’”).

"																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
PN_09	Solar Installs on City Facilities																	N	"To date, the City has just over 500 kilowatts (kW) of solar electricity installed on 13 facilities. Mayor Hales has asked BPS to work toward doubling the amount of solar installed on City facilities, which would bring the installed total to about one megawatt. 

BPS has been evaluating City facilities for solar for over eight years and all of the most cost-effective systems have been installed. We’re in the midst of installing another 70 kilowatts on N. Police Precinct, thanks to a grant from Pacific Power. This will bring our total to 578 kW.

BPS staff have been working with our electrical contractor to review and evaluate the second- and third-tier sites. After further site reviews and financial analysis, three potential projects could be constructed in the short term:








This would bring total installed capacity to about 773 kW.

These three sites are all in Portland General Electric’s service territory. PGE plans to release an RFP for renewable project grant funds sometime in 2016. We have been planning to apply for funds for SWCC since late 2014. Our contractor suggested possibly packaging these three sites together into one proposal for PGE. However, the RFP release has been delayed for close to a year by the Oregon Public Utility Commission (OPUC) and we have no confidence that we can obtain these funds while Mayor Hales is in office. 

If the City were to purchase the two smaller systems, the simple payback would be between 18-20 years. 
"																													Y			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PN_10	Salmon Safe																	N	"Salmon-Safe is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization based in Portland whose mission is to transform land management practices so Pacific salmon can thrive in West Coast watersheds. Salmon-Safe has become one of the region's leading ecolabels with more than 95,000 acres of farm and urban lands certified in Oregon, Washington, California, and British Columbia. The Salmon-Safe retail campaign has been featured in 300 supermarkets and natural food stores, delivering important marketplace benefits to participating landowners. 

In 2004, Portland Parks & Recreation became the first parks organization in the country to earn the Salmon-Safe certification, and Parks was recertified in 2012. In 2013, in his address at World Environment Day, Mayor Hales challenged all City operations to obtain Salmon-Safe certification, making Portland the nation’s first Salmon-Safe certified city.  
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PN_11	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$34,560 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PN_12	FY 2015-16 Carryover: BPS one-time GF projects																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PN_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PN_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS	Commissioner of Public Safety																	C																																	EXCLUDE													
PS_01	OMF IA Balancing													Commissioner's Office				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$788 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building.
$47,062 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$1,657 for the office’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation. 
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PS_02	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_03	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_04	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PS_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU	Commissioner of Public Utilities																	C																																														
PU_01	OMF IA Balancing													Commissioner's Office				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$876 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building.
$50,451 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$1,777 for the office’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation. 
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PU_02	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_03	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_04	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PU_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW	Commissioner of Public Works																	C																																														
PW_01	CPW-Eliminate Vacant CSR Position																	N	To comply with the Mayor's direction for 5% cuts, the Commissioner of Public Works is eliminating a vacant CSR position.																													N			EXCLUDE													
PW_02	OMF IA Balancing													Commissioner's Office				N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$802 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building
$46,777 is added to the bureau budget to major maintenance at City Hall. This was previously funded through a direct cash transfer from General Fund Funds Management. The discretionary amount added to the bureau is equal to the transfer. However, additional overhead resources increase the overall contribution to major maintenance.
$1,647 for the office’s allocation of the Daycare Center relocation. 
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
PW_03	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_04	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_05	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_06	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_07	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_08	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
PW_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA	Special Appropriations																	C																																														
SA_01	OYVP - Street Level Gang Outreach (SLGO)													Office of Youth Violence Prevention				N	This request is for $52,000 in ongoing General Fund resources to support of the needs of the emerging refugee population of Portland.  In the current budget year, the Office of Youth Violence Prevention (OYVP), through a contract with the Immigrant Refugee Community Organization (IRCO), is supplying funding for two part-time Street Level Gang Outreach (SLGO) worker positions. Due to the rate of growth of Portland’s refugee population, there is a need to change these positions to full time (FTE).  All other SLGO positions are funded at full time.  Due to the dramatic increase in the amount of gang violence experienced nationally as well as locally, shifting current resources for the purpose of funding the part time positions at full time would be detrimental to the other gang impacted populations currently served through the Street Level Gang Outreach Grant Program.	This package would increase Street Level Gang Outreach (SLGO) services currently being provided at half time to full time, which would allow these positions to effectively reach the increased refugee population and to address the increase in gang violence experienced both nationally and locally.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_02	Innovation Fund 5% Reductions													Special Appropriations				N	The City Council approved $1 million in ongoing Special Appropriations funding for the City of Portland Innovation Fund managed by OMF since FY 2014-15. Special Appropriations will be subject to the 5% cut target. OMF recommends that this cut not be taken. The $50,000 cut from the Innovation Fund would result in up to one major grant and two micro grants not being approved in the next fiscal year. City Council has supported these proposals because they promote equity and opportunity, improve customer service, save time or money for the City or community, and improve City services.	"Beginning in FY 2013-14, City Council provided $1 million in ongoing Special Appropriations funding for the City of Portland Innovation Fund. Management of the Innovation Fund project grants process was moved to OMF in FY 2014-15. Innovation proposals are now evaluated based on the following criteria. The proposal should:
1) Promote equity and opportunity in City government and our community
2) Improve customer service to the community and/or City customers
3) Save time and money for the City, partners, or community members
4) Improve City services and make things better

OMF's goal for managing this process was to contribute to an organizational culture that promotes new ideas. In FY 2014-15, OMF received 134 proposals, staffed the process for an Innovation Fund Review Panel to evaluate the proposals and recommend them for funding, communicated with the 41 project award recipients, supported City staff training opportunities and conducted marketing campaigns to call for ideas.
This decision package complies with the Mayor's budget directions that General Fund bureaus and programs must submit 5% reductions."																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_03	COCL/COAB Add OSS II													Special Appropriations				N	"This request is for $68,590 in ongoing General Fund resources to fund a full-time Office Support Specialist II (OSSII) position. This new position would be responsible for all Community Oversight Advisory Board (COAB) and subcommittee meeting logistics, including but not limited to; scheduling space and ADA accommodation needs, providing public notice of meetings via the COCL-COAB website and social media channels, coordinating with Portland Community Media to broadcast full COAB meetings, ordering refreshments, and set up and break down meeting spaces. In addition, the OSSII would provide logistical support for quarterly Compliance Officer and Community Liaison (COCL) Town Hall meetings, answer phones and greet the public at the COCL-COAB office, and provide general administrative support for the COCL and COAB, including but not limited to; assembling agenda packets and meeting materials, maintaining office supplies, processing contract timesheets, travel reimbursements, and invoices for service contracts.  Currently, COCL members themselves are doing some of this administrative work, which is not the highest and best use of their time, nor is it reflective of the intent of the Settlement Agreement.  According to the Settlement Agreement, “the City shall provide administrative support so that the Compliance Officer/Community Liaison can perform the duties and responsibilities identified in this Agreement.”

The 20-member Community Oversight Advisory Board is tasked with independently assessing the implementation of the City’s Department of Justice Settlement Agreement (Settlement Agreement), making recommendations on additional actions, advising Police command staff and Police Commissioner on strategies to improve police-community relations, providing the community with information on the Settlement Agreement and its implementation, contributing to the development and implementation of a Portland Police Bureau Community Engagement and Outreach Plan, and receive public comments and concerns. 

An Assistant Program Specialist currently provides administrative and program support to both the Compliance Officer/Community Liaison members and the full COAB and its five subcommittees. However, to effectively and efficiently support both COCL and the COAB, there is a need for an additional Office Support Specialist II position.
"	Shifting these administrative responsibilities to an OSSII would enable the Assistant Program Specialist to focus on maintaining up-to-date, accurate COAB meeting minutes, effectively tracking multiple COAB recommendations from creation to approval and notification of the Settlement Agreement parties, developing more impactful COAB public outreach and engagement, including support for the emerging COAB Speakers Bureau. The COCL Support Specialist would also coordinate with other City offices and bureaus, meet community expectations with timely and thorough COCL-COAB.org website updates, and monitor the COCL and COAB overall budget. The COCL Team members would transfer administrative duties (timekeeping, travel reimbursements, invoicing, website management, COAB recommendation tracking, etc.) which they have been doing, allowing more time for substantive research and analysis work for which they are contracted to perform.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_04	COCL/COAB Transfer													Special Appriations				N	Transfer funding from Mayor's Office and Office of Equity and Human Rights to Special Appropriations.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
SA_05	OYVP - 5% Cut													Office of Youth Violence Prevention				N	This decision package reduces the Office of Youth Violence Prevention’s (OYVP) budget by $39,927, or 5% of their FY 2016-17 target in compliance with budget direction.	This reduction impacts the Office’s ability to respond to emergency requests from gang impacted individuals and families within the community as well as to provide sponsorships for youth activities that provide healthy alternatives to gangs.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_06	Columbia River Levee Ready Project													Special Appropriations				N	The levee system along the Columbia River extends from Sauvie Island to Troutdale and currently this system is under the federal recertification process. The current certification is expiring in 2017. The last certification was completed in 2007 and is due to expire in 2017. The levees must be re-certified to the new US Army Corps of Engineer standards or the property owners face de-accreditation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  Failure to receive accreditation by FEMA means that flood insurance will become much more expensive, if available at all, potentially resulting in a significant financial impact for the property owners protected by the levee system. As such, the Levee Ready Columbia group was established in 2014-15 with a multi-jurisdictional partnership to first determine the current status of the levee system and eventually identify any construction requirements required to re-certify to new FEMA standards. The City of Portland (the “City”) is a property holder and one of the many partner agencies in this long-term recertification project.	"City Council entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) in November 2015 with the following parties: Multnomah County, the Port of Portland, Multnomah County Drainage District, Metro, the City of Gresham, the City of Troutdale, the City of Fairview, and the Sandy Drainage Improvement Company. This IGA sets forth the cost sharing terms for the Oregon Infrastructure Finance Authority (IFA) loan and Multnomah County is responsible for making the annual payment on the IFA loan which will begin in December 2017. Included in the IGA is the City’s share for a onetime contribution for expenses not covered by the IFA loan. That amount is $87,435, and is due in FY 2016- 2017.

The City’s share of the IFA loan for both engineering phases of the Levee Ready Project is $1.6 million, with repayment beginning in December 2017. There is no penalty for early repayment of the City’s share and as resource availability is uncertain, it is the recommendation of the Office of Management and Finance to use one-time General Fund resources for this obligation in FY 2016-17. 
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_07	RACC 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N	5% budget reduction equals to $204,864	"The impacts of budget reduction are as follows:
1) Fewer and smaller grants to local artists and arts organizations
2) A reduction in outreach efforts, workshops, and other forms of technical support
3) Constrained ability to raise private sector funding through Work for Arts
4) A freeze in RACC's efforts to bring arts intergrated learning to more Portland students through the Right Brain Initiative
5) No cost of living increase for RACC staff

RACC requests that this reduction not be taken.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_08	Future Connect 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_09	Mt Hood Regulatory 5% Reduction													Special Appropriations				N	"This reduction significantly reduces resources to advocate, mostly at the federal level, for local interests on behalf of the six member jursidictions (Fairview, Gresham, Portland, Troutdale, Wood Village and Multnomah County) and their communities related to communications and cable policy.  					
This reduction reduces resources to advocate, mostly at the federal level, for local interests on behalf of the six member jurisdictions (Fairview, Gresham, Portland, Troutdale, Wood Village, and Multnomah County) and their comuunities related to communications and cable policy.				
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
"	"The package will reduce advocacy on communications and cable policy on behalf of the six jurisdictions, their residents and cable consumers in Multnomah County. MHRC will have reduced capacity to partner and collaborate in local, regional, and national efforts to advocate at the Federal Communications Commission and in Congress. For example, currently the MHCRC is actively participating in two FCC proceedings that may directly impact franchise fees: Multi-Channel Video Program Distributors (MVPD) and Reconsideration Order. The MVPD proceding involves over the top providers (OTT) and how they may be classified (non cable which translates into less local authority for revenue and public benefits). For example, Comcast could start providing all of its video programming over its broadband. Portland currently receives $6.2 million in cable franchise fees from Comcast annually.  The Reconsideration Order jeopardises franchise fees by making them subject to subject to offsets for in kind services such as cable drop in schools and I-Nets used for data transmission. Currently, through the partnership between IRNE, INET and Comcast, 241 schools, libraries and city sites receive high bandwidth at low cost. Additionally, nearly 78 schools have cable drops. The proceeding could allow the cable company to offset the value of the cable drops and INET connections against franchise fees.
The other participating jurisdictions contributions to the MHCRC will be reduced by the same percentage per Commission's set budget formula thus exacerbating the impact of the cuts but keeping the proportional contributions the same. Specific reductions are consultant resources to join with other communities to advocate for local authority, travel and membership fees for TeleCommunity. TeleCommunity membership is a valuable resource providing detailed information and strategy on relevant issues on Capitol Hill and at FCC which helps us craft messaging for lobbying. TeleCommunity also offers particiaption in coalitions of cities to advocate on communications issues at reasonable costs. This reduction represents an overall reduction of 65% in the advocacy budget."																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_10	All Hands Raised 5% Reduction													Special Appropriations				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_11	City Memberships 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_12	Specified Animals 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_13	CASH Oregon 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_14	Clean & Safe 5% Reduction													Special Appropriation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REDUCTION											
SA_15	Labor Education & Research Center													Special Appropriation				N	"The 2016-17 Project: Qualitative Study of the Effect of Unpredictable Scheduling Practices in Portland and Multnomah County.

The Equity in the Economy Initiative will seek to understand the schedules and hours of low-wage workers in a range of occupations, including: retail, health care and social assistance, leisure and hospitality (food and hotel accommodations), office temporary work, janitorial and maintenance, and childcare.  We will examine how schedules and scheduling practices affect income and housing stability, as well as the stability of childcare and family life.  Our previous publication, The High Cost of Low Wages laid a solid foundation for understanding employers and jobs that keep working families in a relentless cycle of poverty and fragility.  Through our interviews with low-wage working women we learned about the “churn” in most workers lives—irregular work hours, involuntary part-time work, and the impacts of unpredictable schedules on family responsibilities and ability to sustain enough income to make ends meet.  

In order to better understand unpredictable scheduling practices we are proposing to implement a qualitative study of low-wage workers in a range of employment sectors.  The state of Oregon’s Employment Department does not collect data on the prevalence of unpredictable scheduling practices among Oregon businesses, nor does it track fluctuations in hours worked by workers as a result of these practices.  Our research will provide much needed new information for policy makers about these practices and their impacts on workers in this region.  

We propose to conduct in-depth interviews with workers to explore the extent to which they have experienced involuntary unpredictable scheduling of their work hours in the past 6 months.  We will also explore the impact this has had on their income, housing stability, and childcare and family stability.  The interviews will be digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim.  We will conduct, code, and analyze the interviews and produce a report with the intention of designing policy initiatives to address this problem. We will assure the sample is diverse by employment sector, race/ethnicity, and immigration status, and we will seek to interview approximately 40 low-wage workers by Aug. 31, 2016.
"	"By the end of January 2017 we will produce a brief report that presents findings from our data collected from interviews with workers with precarious schedules.  This report will feature qualitative research from interviews with workers who are immersed in the low-wage economy as they try to keep themselves and their families housed, fed, and in good health.   We will also produce a policy brief and public presentation summarizing the findings to City and County Commissioners. Finally, we will publish the findings from the study in public policy, sociology, and family studies journals.

This project is being led by Dr. Ellen Scott, Professor, University of Oregon Department of Sociology; LERC faculty member Raahi Reddy, M. A.; and Camila Alvarez, Graduate Researcher, Ph.D. candidate. 
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_16	RACC - Add													Special Appropriation				N	RACC requests $3 million ongoing to fully realize the goals ofthe City's voter-approved Arts Education & Access Fund	"The additional fund will be used as follows:
1) $1.6 million to bring city funding for General Operating Support organizations to 5% of their annual eligible income
2) $1.4 million to provide Project Grants and Arts Equity Grants to smaller and emerging nonprofit organizations that are making arts and culture more accessible to every Portland resident"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_17	Council Transition Costs													Special Appropriation				N	This package requests funding for the transition costs for the Mayor's Office. Funds will be used to refresh facilities and technology in preparation for the new administration. Funds will also be used to cover the cost of the transition team consisting of a Mayor's Chief of Staff and Commissioner's Staff Representative for two months.	The ovreall goal is to provide a smooth transition for the newly elected officials.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_18	SW Corridor Plan - Year 3													Special Appropriation				N	"The Southwest Corridor (SWC) Plan is a regional effort led by Metro in partnership with TriMet, Washington County, and the cities of Portland, Tigard and Tualatin and others to achieve community visions through integrated land use and transportation planning. There are a number of overarching objectives for the Plan from the City of Portland’s perspective. They include: give people ability to use fast, reliable high capacity transit when traveling throughout the corridor as a solution to current and anticipated future traffic congestion problems; create vibrant station areas surrounded by businesses, housing and services that serve local residents; provide a new range of housing choices in SW Portland for people wanting nearby transit access; improve access to key places in SW Corridor neighborhoods by strengthening connectivity for pedestrians and cyclists; and expand opportunities for employment in the corridor by linking and improving access to education and medical campuses and related businesses as well as other commercial establishments along SW Barbur Blvd. Additionally the City is seeking to improve access to and between higher education campuses within the corridor and throughout the region, provide opportunities to reconnect inner south Portland neighborhoods by reconfiguring travel patterns for regional traffic, and transform SW Barbur Blvd from a highway remnant into a people-friendly street.

This is a third year of Special Appropriation requests to support the preparation of a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) and selection of a Locally Preferred Alternative (LPA) for the Southwest Corridor Plan. In FY 14/15, City Council provided $650,000 of General Fund support for the effort with $500,000 that went to Metro and $150,000 available to fund City staff work on the plan.   Council authorized a similar level of funding support in FY 15/16, with $550,000 to go to Metro and $150,000 available to fund City staff work for an overall total of $1.35 million. During FY 16-17 the request will fund a larger number of City staff from multiple bureaus (PBOT, BPS, BES, PWB, and Parks) involved in the technical analyses that will be performed for the DEIS, which will lead to its completion and selection of an LPA in FY 17-18. There is no additional match funding to Metro in this request.
"	"The current year work plan for Southwest Corridor in FY 15/16 will result in the identification of the preferred high capacity transit (HCT) alternative (LRT or BRT), and a narrowed and more focused list of alignment options. This effort will lead directly into FY 16-17 technical DEIS analyses required as part of the evaluation of impacts of the various alternatives. The work plan through FY 17-18 will include completion of the DEIS and confirmation of the Locally Preferred Alternative (LPA) by all of the SWC Plan’s regional partners.

"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_19	CUB Bill Inserts													Special Appropriation				N	"Twice a year, the City includes a bill insert describing its partnership with CUB and encouraging Portlanders to learn more about the organization’s work. Printing, shipping, and internal P&D charges associated with this insert will be covered by this Special Appropriation. This appropriation covers one year of expenses.


"	"The bill insert will be sent to all 360,000 Portland Water Bureau account holders. It will inform customers of CUB’s work providing a valuable independent voice for consumers. The expected outcome is better informed utility customers aware of CUB’s advocacy on their behalf.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_20	Village Market													Special Appropriation				N	The Village Market, the focus of the requested funds, was designed to meet a basic community-defined need: the lack of access to a local corner grocery store where fresh, healthy, culturally appropriate food can be purchased at a reasonable price.  In a neighborhood with the nearest grocery store nearly two miles away, and 33% of households living without vehicles, the New Columbia and Tamaracks community now have a store offering fresh healthy produce, culturally appropriate meats, whole grains, low and non-fat dairy products and other household items found at a full-scale grocery store.  The three items not sold at the Market are:  tobacco products, alcohol and lottery tickets.  Funds requested (representing only 6.5% of the total budget) are necessary to bridge the gap between market sales and annual operating costs.	"The outcome of this project ensures that 4,000 low-income residents living in North Portland affordable housing neighborhoods have continued walkable access to a neighborhood-based, healthy corner grocery store selling fresh, organic produce, culturally appropriate foods and other household items at a reasonable price.  

Goals:

1)	The store serves over 400 customers daily (with 160,000 customer contacts annually).  Since the bulk of the surrounding neighborhood is composed of families (50% of the population are children), the impact reaches far more individuals per year in what is considered a “food desert” at a cost to the City of only 41 cents/contact.
2)	In addition, Village Market provides employment opportunities for residents, a source for Food Works Farm sales in the summer, and a Farmers’ Market for neighborhood growers to market their goods.
3)	Village Market is a food hub – creating food access, providing jobs, supporting micro entrepreneurs and being a place for community cohesion and safety.
4)	Village Market has a Healthy Incentive Program where folks who are receiving SNAP are able to get an additional 30% off their purchase of fruits and veggies.
5)	For the past 3 months, the Fresh Fruit for Kids Program has allowed kids 18 and under to get a free apple, orange, or banana between 7-10 am.  This has now been expanded to all-day access.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_21	Salmon-Safe City Project													Special Appropriations				N	"Salmon-Safe is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization based in Portland whose mission is to transform land management practices so Pacific salmon can thrive in West Coast watersheds. Salmon-Safe has become one of the region's leading ecolabels with more than 95,000 acres of farm and urban lands certified in Oregon, Washington, California, and British Columbia. The Salmon-Safe retail campaign has been featured in 300 supermarkets and natural food stores, delivering important marketplace benefits to participating landowners. 

In 2004, Portland Parks & Recreation became the first parks organization in the country to earn the Salmon-Safe certification, and Parks was recertified in 2012. In 2013, in his address at World Environment Day, Mayor Hales challenged all City operations to obtain Salmon-Safe certification, making Portland the nation’s first Salmon-Safe certified city.  
"	"To pursue Salmon-Safe certification for City bureaus that own or manage property, buildings, and other facilities, in FY14-15 the City entered into a contract with Salmon-Safe, launching the 2 ½ year project.  In the first 18 months, BES, PBOT, and the Water Bureau have gone through an evaluation and initial certification process, with conditional certification awarded in early 2016. The two remaining bureaus with significant relevant operations are the Office of Management and Finance and Portland Fire and Rescue. Last year, the City entered into a contract with Salmon-Safe that extends to January 31, 2017, anticipating an amount not to exceed $45,000 in FY 2016-2017.  The certification process includes an assessment of bureau policies, programs, and practices, assessment of specific sites, and development of conditions that must be met to protect water quality, salmon habitat, and watershed health. Work with Fire and OMF is currently underway and is on schedule to be completed by fall 2016, barring unforeseen developments.

Briefly describe the desired outcomes that are expected upon completion of this project or initiative:

The $48k in funding in 16-17 will complete the assessment and negotiated certification conditions to enable OMF and Fire to join BES, Water, PBOT, and Parks in achieving certification, fulfilling the mayor’s challenge to bring all City operations into certification. Outcomes include:
•	Advance City policies and programs to protect and enhance watershed health.
•	Provide program verification, accountability and transparency.
•	Promote resource use efficiency and potential cost savings.
•	Support applications for grant funding and innovative public/private partnerships.
•	Provide innovation credit under U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED rating system.
•	Ensure consistent standards apply across city properties, programs and contacts.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_22	OMF Fund Administration Charge																	N																														N			EXCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
SA_23	Native American (Delete. Replaced by SA_25)													Special Appropriations				N	"NAYA was informally founded by parent volunteers in 1974 and became a 501(c)(3) organization in 1994. It serves self-identified Native American youth and their families throughout the Portland, Oregon metropolitan area. The largest employer of Native American people in the Northwest, NAYA delivers Youth Education Services, Family Services, Community Economic Development, and Community Engagement, while also operating an alternative high school, the NAYA Early College Academy. As an urban Indian agency, NAYA Family Center impacts the lives of over 9,000 individuals from over 380 tribal backgrounds annually. NAYA is minority-controlled.

Native Americans are over-represented in the foster care system, and have some of the worst rates of graduation and poverty. More than 1 in 5 foster children are Native American. In Portland, only 3 in 10 Native students receive a high school diploma or GED. Half of Native children live in poverty. The Generations project is focused on addressing this inequity. 

Generations will be an intergenerational community of permanent, dedicated housing for foster children, parents wishing to adopt foster children, and community Elders. The RELA will provide early-childhood education for neighborhood children ages zero-to-five in partnership with Portland Public Schools, and a community center styled after a Northwest Native American Long House, which will provide supportive services in education, family workforce readiness, and a community health clinic. 
"																													N			EXCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_24	Lents Stabilization Project													Special Appropriations				N	Lents stabilization and job creation project.																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_25	Native American - NAYA (Rev)													Special Appropriations				N	"NAYA was informally founded by parent volunteers in 1974 and became a 501(c)(3) organization in 1994. It serves self-identified Native American youth and their families throughout the Portland, Oregon metropolitan area. The largest employer of Native American people in the Northwest, NAYA delivers Youth Education Services, Family Services, Community Economic Development, and Community Engagement, while also operating an alternative high school, the NAYA Early College Academy. As an urban Indian agency, NAYA Family Center impacts the lives of over 9,000 individuals from over 380 tribal backgrounds annually. NAYA is minority-controlled. The mission of NAYA is to enhance the diverse strengths of our youth and families in partnership with the community through cultural identity and education.

Generations Regional Early Learning Academy (RELA) and Long House (LH) Community Center project, a development partnership between NAYA and Portland Public Schools (PPS). The RELA, and the LH in Portland’s southeast Lents neighborhood will be located on a 3.5-acre site of a former public elementary school. The site is also near transit, shopping and public parks. The project will be built to LEED Gold standards.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_26	Grants													Special Appropriations				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_27	Rose City Resource Guide													Special Appropriations				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_28	Symphony in the Park (via RACC)																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_29	Last Thursday																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_30	Restorative Justice																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_31	Rosewood Community Center																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_32	James Beard Public Market																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
SA_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_51	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_52	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_53	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_54	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_55	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_56	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_57	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_58	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_59	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_60	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_61	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_62	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_63	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_64	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_65	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_66	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_67	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_68	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_69	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_70	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_71	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_72	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_73	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_74	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
SA_75	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR	Office of Transportation																	C																																														
TR_01	Major Maintenance and Infrastructure Replacement													Capital				N	Per the Mayor’s FY 2016-17 Budget Guidance, one-time requests for General Fund should focus on taking care of the City’s existing assets. To assist Council in allocating these funds to the highest priority major maintenance and asset replacement projects, a citywide project ranking was developed.  In order for these projects to be considered for funding, bureaus must submit these projects as General Fund one-time requests in the FY 2016-17 budget process.	"PBOT is requesting $35,948,232 in general fund support for the following projects:
Traffic Signal Reconst.
Street Lighting Safety & Efficiency
SW Capital Highway Sidewalks & Paving
Pavement - Halsey
Naito- Harrison to Jefferson
Pavement - Capital Hwy
10th & Yamhill SmartPark
Pavement- Mill & 80th
Pavement - SE 136th
NW 23rd Avenue: Lovejoy to Vaughn
Micro-Surfacing
Thinlays
BR #025 NE 12th Avenue Bridge at I-84
Attenuator Replacements 
BR #094 NE Sunderland Road Bridge Replacement 
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS	ONETIME										
TR_02	Youth Bus Pass													Transportation Partnerships				N	This package requests General Fund support for the City’s share of the Youth Bus Pass Program.  This program provides free transit passes to Portland Public Schools (PPS) students during the school year  The cost of the program is shared by PPS, TriMet, and the City.  About 12,600 PPS high school students take TriMet to get to class.  The Youth Bus Pass Program is a key component of providing universal access to educational opportunity for Portland students, and boosting graduation rates.	Youth Transit Program will continue to support universal access to educational opportunity for Portland students.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS	ONETIME										
TR_03	Safety and Education (Vision Zero)													Active Transportation				N	"The Portland Bureau of Transportation is committed to Vision Zero, a safety strategy that aims to eliminate fatal and serious injuries through a safe systems approach involving street design, traffic enforcement, and education. PBOT established this commitment in our two-year work plan, Portland Progress. City Council expanded this commitment city-wide via resolution in 2015.

In pursuit of Vision Zero, PBOT has convened a Vision Zero Task Force with representatives from Police, Fire and Rescue, Transportation, Public Health, advocacy groups (including equity focused organizations), Portland State University and freight interests. With this diverse group, we are reviewing comprehensive crash data analysis and identifying a range of 2-year and 5-year strategies to achieve zero traffic deaths.  This work has suggested that specific roadway designs and specific human behaviors are leading contributors to fatal and serious injury crashes. To address these issues, PBOT has developed a two-part proposal to jump start our Vision Zero effort in the community and to get needed pedestrian safety improvements on the ground quickly with local funds.

Vision Zero – Dangerous Behaviors $100,000
Drunk and drugged driving, speeding, and failure to yield are top contributing factors to Portland’s fatal and serious injury crashes. To this end, Portland Progress calls for PBOT to engage the community in multimodal safety education and awareness campaigns in conjunction with partners, such as the Police Bureau and Fire and Rescue.  This Vision Zero Dangerous Behaviors Education Campaign effort would focus on engaging Portlanders on these specific behaviors in new and innovative ways.  Approaches will include:
•	Vision Zero Street Teams. Visible teams of 15+ PBOT and partner agency staff will perform focused outreach and intercept surveys on Vision Zero and traffic safety at High Crash intersections and in targeted neighborhoods to reach underserved communities. 
•	DUII Safe Ride Home partnership with Old Town / Chinatown. This partnership will seek to partner with bars linked to significant numbers of DUII crashes, working to get drunk patrons home safely and limit overservice. Portland has over 900 bars, of these, the top 25 account for 22% of all DUII crashes. Many of the top 25 bars are located in Old Town.
•	“Picturing DUII” photo story featuring real Portland stories of love and loss about driving under the influence of intoxicants. This project will be both physical and web based, and placed in community spaces (libraries, communities centers, DMVs, etc.) to make DUII personal and relevant to Portlanders
•	Fixed Speed Camera outreach. Ahead of the rollout of Portland’s Fixed Speed Camera program, staff will partner with community organizations, and neighborhood/business associations on safe driving speeds on High Crash Corridors, particularly around schools, parks, and business districts.
•	Collaborations for Community Safety. PBOT will work through existing partnerships with community organizations to provide grant funds for community groups to engage in Vision Zero campaigns that are specifically relevant to their neighborhood, community, language and culture.

Vision Zero – Young Portlanders/Safe Routes to School $100,000
Our Vision Zero Task Force has also raised the importance of educating youth in how to safely navigate their neighborhoods. Educating the next generation of Portland commuters is a critical component of creating a safe transportation system. Crash data analysis from our Vision Zero effort shows that young drivers are significantly overrepresented in fatal and serious injury crashes.  This Vision Zero Young Portlanders effort would be paired with our Safe Routes to School program infrastructure, with a focus on engaging young Portlanders on these specific behaviors in new and innovative ways. Approaches will include:
•	Targeted efforts focused on engaging middle school and high school students in traffic safety, with a focus on empowering youth leadership to promote safe transportation in their own school communities
•	Explore safe young driver pilot programs, utilizing technology such as GPS devices plugged into ODB ports to incentivize safe driving with young people. This effort would explore providing parents of young drivers new tools for monitoring their students driving and to incentivize driving at safe speeds

Vision Zero – Safer Crossings $300,000
This funding proposal is focused on upgrading existing pedestrian crossings that don’t meet current best practices for safety, and creating new safe crossings on high priority multilane streets.  This funding will provide safety improvement retrofits at 2 locations that do not meet current best practices for safety on NE Glisan and provide a corridor pedestrian safety strategy for NE MLK, which has been highlighted as high priority roadway based on recent Vision Zero crash data analysis. Work will focus on providing “active warning” (aka. Rectangular Rapid Flash Beacons) crossing improvements at the highest priority crossings on the Bureau’s list. Studies have shown that improvements of this sort increase the compliance rates of motorists yielding to pedestrians in crosswalks from 20% or less without the active warning to 80% and higher once the Rapid Flash Beacons have been installed. Pedestrian crossing improvements to be constructed will include:
•	NE Glisan and 87th ($75k)
•	NE Glisan and 134th  ($75k)
•	NE MLK Crossing Strategy ($150k)
"	"
The funding will make the Vision Zero Task Force’s work real and visible in the Portland community, and will greatly raise the awareness of traffic safety for Portland residents. It will strengthen partnerships with other agencies and the community, and will infuse the Vision Zero Action Plan with more community input. It will also allow us to swiftly address known safety needs on NE Glisan and NE MLK with local funds. 
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS	ONGOING										
TR_04	Streetplan Connectivity in Growing Centers													Transportation Planning				N	"This project will develop a future access/circulation plan for two Comp Plan designated Centers in East Portland and along 82nd Avenue to serve as the model for improving connectivity in Centers citywide. Centers targeted for additional density the East Portland Pattern Area often suffer from poor multimodal connectivity. The Plan will focus on Centers in East Portland and along 82nd Avenue to create more equitable service levels where street connectivity is deficient. 

The Street Plan will develop a plan for establishing 1) future street connections WITHIN Centers and 2) safe routes TO Centers from adjacent neighborhoods.  Two Centers along East Portland Corridors (such as 82nd, 122nd, Division, etc.) will be selected to serve as a model (for subsequent Street Plans citywide) for enhancing connectivity to promote greater opportunities and access to transportation systems needed for East Portland residents to reach local businesses, transit stops, schools and other neighborhood destinations.

Tasks Requiring Funding in FY 2016-17:			
Connectivity needs assessment and policy/regulatory review	
•	Identify gaps in connectivity and barriers to access
•	Select of two Centers along East Portland Corridors (such as 82nd, 122nd, Division, etc.)
•	Review City of Portland practices and lessons from other cities

Community engagement	
•	Develop public involvement plan: stakeholder identification and impact assessment
•	Outreach activities to neighbors and community groups (particularly communities of color, immigrant/refugee communities), businesses and property owners

Recommend future street connections within Centers	
•	Assess sites: market potential for redevelopment and future street/pathway candidates
•	Recommend map of future street/pathway connections within Centers
•	Recommend regulatory improvements – connectivity requirements with developments

Recommend safe routes to Centers (20 minute neighborhoods) 	
•	Define primary active transportation routes connecting destinations in Centers with the adjacent neighborhood
•	Recommend map of primary neighborhood routes to the Centers

Model Centers Street Plan  	
•	Establish template and regulatory improvements for application in other Centers (citywide)
•	Preliminary conceptual cost estimates
"	"This project will set the stage for anticipated growth by determining the alignment of future street connections and safe routes to the centers (from adjacent neighborhoods) to facilitate necessary improvements as development occurs.

The result of this work would include:
Two Centers in East Portland/82nd Avenue
•	Street Plans to enhance access and circulation. 
Citywide
•	Recommend regulatory improvements for achieving connectivity in designated Centers. 
•	A model for subsequent Street Plans to enhance connectivity in other 2035 Comp Plan designated Centers citywide.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS	ONETIME										
TR_05	Development Review - Add Position													Development Permitting				N	"This position is being added to provide additional engineering staff to assist in the review of development applications, building plan reviews, traffic studies and occasional assistance for public works permits.  Currently this staffing need is being provided through a temporary promotional upgrade of an existing PBOT employee.  This permanent position is funded through development fees and is expected to be full cost recovery.  This permanent position is needed to provide quality engineering review of PBOT codes, standards and to ensure timely response and good customer service.  Without this position PBOT will not be able to respond to development applications at the current expected service levels.
"	This position will provide direct engineering support for building plan and development review staff.  This position is expected to conduct permit review, scope and analyze traffic studies, and help with increased workload.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
TR_06	Utility Construction & Inspection - Add Position													Development Review				N	As the inspection staff supervisor, this person will completely revamp how inspections are processed, coordinated and completed.  They will implement an inspection process utilizing mobile and technology solutions to better give PBOT real time information from the field and be able to track, monitor and schedule inspections from the general public and with other City, State and County agencies. In the short term, this position will act as the point person for PBOT for two critical projects and to act as the supervisor for the Public Works Inspectors in the utilities, Construction and Inspection Division. This position with be the lead point of contact responsible for PBOT's efforts implementing the ITAP project, a citywide online permitting and review project.  The second project is that of overseeing the Google Fiber permitting, construction and coordination implementation effort.	This position will efficiently and effectively manage the utitility permitting procress.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	ADDS											
TR_07	Regulatory Operations - Add Positions													Regulatory				N	"This package add positions for Regulatory Operations.  These positions are responsible for regulating private-for-hire vehicles, including taxis, transportation network companies, limousine, non-emergency medical transports.  The Senior Management Analyst will collect and analyze ride and financial data from all Permitted Private-for-Hire Companies. The position will help manage and track contracts, analyze data and produce a variety of reports.  The position will also provide support in regards to research and data collection for the Towing Program.  The Regulatory Program Specialists will  process permit applications, monitor permit compliance, and investigate complaints for private-for-hire transportation companies.  PBOT has an immediate need for these positions, and is working with the Bureau of Human Resources (BHR) to create limited term positions in FY15-16.  This decision package provides budget authority for these positions, either as new positions, or to convert limited term positions to permanent positions.  The positions include;
•	Senior Management Analyst – one full-time                1.00 FTE
•	30000189-Regulatory Program Specialist – fulltime     1.00 FTE
•	30000189-Regulatory Program Specialist – part-time    .50 FTE
•	30000189-Regulatory Program Specialist – part-time    .50 FTE
"	The City will continue to provide effective and efficient regulation of private-for-hire transportation and towing in the City of Portland.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	ADDS											
TR_08	Photo Radar - Add Position													Active Transportation				N	This package adds a position for the Photo Radar Program.  The position is a program manager.  The Photo Radar Program improves safety by catching speeders and deterring aggressive driving.  In  2015, Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) were updated to allow fixed cameras in high-crash corridors.  PBOT will work with Portland Police and Multnomah County Court to implement cameras in Portland.  This position will provide program oversight, outreach and public involvement, and intergovernmental coordination for the photo radar program, including fixed cameras.	The City will manage a photo radar program to improve safety in high-crash corridors.																												Y			INCLUDE	08	ADDS											
TR_09	Capital Program - Add Position													Capital				N	PBOT anticipates receiving up to $10 million in federal funds for transportation safety improvements over the next five years.   The expectation is that PBOT will deliver a wide range of safety improvements quickly and efficiently.  Delivering this work will require coordination of City staff and consultants by PBOT’s capital projects group.  It is anticipated that this work will require the assignment of one full time project manager.	This position is necessary to insured that important safety projects can be effectively and efficienctly delivered.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	ADDS											
TR_10	Streetcar - Add Position													Streetcar				N	With the opening of the Eastside Loop and Completion of the Loop, Portland Streetcar transit service has increased.  The Streetcar now operates three lines, North South (NS), A Loop (clockwise) and B Loop (counter clockwise).  With this increase, we now schedule 14 vehicles in service per day.  An additional Utility Worker I position is needed for cleaning platforms and vehicles.  We currently have 5 UW I’s working to keep all 17 vehicles, 70+ platforms, and the streetcar facility clean.  The UW I’s are scheduled to meet system needs, as service is provided 7 days a week, approximately 20 hours per day.	This position will allow Streetcar to provide quality transit and maintain a clean, welcoming environment for our riders at stops and on-vehicles.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	ADDS											
TR_100	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_101	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_102	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_103	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_104	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_105	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_11	Out of the Mud													Capital				N	"Our local streets bind residential zones with corridors and centers to create a rich fabric of the city.  Problem residential streets—those needing a stable paved surface plus those paved needing shoulders or sidewalks to walk safely-- are not seeing improvement by development actions, local improvement districts, or city capital projects at a pace that will address the city’s needs; residents need this ongoing commitment of resources.  The current mayor, like our past mayor, recognized the need to provide ongoing assistance to get residents in the worst of these problem streets out of the mud, and in FY 15-16 provided $1M on ongoing general fund assistance.  This ongoing financial support allows us to meet city goals along the stream-continuum (1) taking climate action, specifically increasing pedestrian, bicycle and transit trips, as well as natural environment protections for our fragile watersheds and streams (2) accommodating growth in centers and corridors, (3) creating 20-minute neighborhoods (4) accommodating people with disabilities (5) allowing for affordable housing (6) maintaining an urban form.

Certain areas of Portland are plagued by problem streets.  Areas where the city has invested in in-depth study with community input as well as funding from state growth management grants, include inner NE Cully, outer SE Division-Midway, and SW Tryon-Stephens.  Other areas blighted by problem streets include SE Brentwood-Darlington, SE Woodstock, N Linton, and broader areas of outer east and west Portland.  

In order to finance Errol Heights, PBOT will be bonding a portion of the General Fund revenue. By bonding a portion of the revenue, PBOT will be able to finance the Council desire for a deferral of assessments for property owners who are lower income or on a fixed income participating in the Errol Heights LID. While the bureau could complete one other future project (either based on the Cully Neighborhood Street Plan or the Division-Midway Neighborhood Street Plan), this cut would eliminate an ongoing and sustainable program for other projects for the foreseeable future.

Staff is preparing, this fiscal year, to examine a package of improvements for either the Cully or Division-Midway plans. The bureau estimates, with this cut, one of these options could move forward to design and outreach in FY 16-17 and into construction in FY 17-18. This cut could delay the design and outreach phase depending on the cost of the package to FY 17-18 with construction in FY 18-19.

Other projects that could have moved forward with the cut funding are the other package for either the Cully Neighborhood or Division-Midway street plans, as well as other future work on Tryon-Stevens Headwaters Neighborhood Street Plan in Southwest, and a Woodstock Neighborhood package based upon “Roadway Not Improved” work. These projects will not move forward until funding is identified and secured. PBOT has no plans in its 5 year CIP to identify GTR funding for these projects nor has allocated GTR in the past to fund these improvements.

While not as severe as other alternatives, this will disproportionally impact lower income census tracks (Cully, Division-Midway, Woodstock) with higher levels of minority residents. This will also impact traditionally underserved neighborhoods in East Portland and Southwest Portland which have the highest level of unimproved streets, stormwater infrastructure, and are lacking in critical infrastructure on busier streets.
"	Will reduced ability to provide street improvements.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION	ONGOING										
TR_12	Safety and Training - Add Position													Business Services				N	"BHR has determined that PBOT is understaffed in the areas of safety and training compared to other large City bureaus, with only 2.0 FTE being currently dedicated specifically to these functions bureau-wide. Current staffing levels do not allow for adequate safety and training program coverage for both primary PBOT locations, Maintenance Operations and the Portland Building. In addition, current staffing levels do not adequately allow for implementing needed enhancements to bureau-wide safety and training processes, including the ability to manage improvements to training records and other safety and training technology and data systems.

An additional FTE will increase safety and training staff capacity which will facilitate process, system and technology improvements so that PBOT can better serve all of its employees. This decision package also will provide additional resources for emergency management functions as necessary, which is critical given that PBOT is a first responder bureau.
"	PBOT anticipates that this new resource will serve as the bureau’s analytical and project lead for implementing training records system changes bureau wide, to work with City Risk and other stakeholders in developing and providing new data tools for bureau stakeholders, to work on establishing safety and training programs for PBOT Portland Building employees, and to have an ongoing role on the bureau’s emergency management planning/response and continuity of operations teams. The other two dedicated safety and training positions will report directly to this new position and will continue to provide essential workplace safety and training compliance and subject matter consulting expertise, claims management coordination, and related duties.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
TR_13	Business Technology - Convert LT to Permanent													Business Services				N	This package converts a limited-term position to a permanent position in the Business Services / Business Technology Division.  The change is made within current appropriations, and has a net zero dollar impact.  This position is needed to support ongoing mapping due to increased permit, work-order and construction activities.  The job class 30000342 is GIS Technician II and the position number is 40024141.	The position will continue to perform GIS mapping and data editing functions related to PBOT permits, engineering work orders and engineering as-builts. Additional GIS capacity is also needed to support PBOT efforts related to Vision Zero.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REALIGN											
TR_14	Utility Constr&Inspec - Convert LT to Permanent													Development Permitting				N	Due to increase in utility and development permitting, these positions are needed to provide engineering and technical support to better provide turn-around review time for customers including traffic engineering support for both the temporary use of public streets and also support for public street improvements permits, intake of Insurance and Bonding documents, processing and document management.  Respond to customer inquiries regarding Insurance/Bond status.	Provide quicker turn-around review time for customers.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REALIGN											
TR_15	Signals&Streetlighting - Convert LT to Permanent													Signals and Streetlighting				N	As part of the LED conversion, the City is now responsible for maintenance and operations of an additional 44,000 street lights, or an 80% increase in street lights and assoicated, poles, circuits, and controls.  These positions are needed to help design and review plans and specifications for street lights and traffic control devices; managing and inspecting construction or maintenance projects; preparing street light outage reports; analyzing lighting improvements and traffic signal phasing and timing; developing traffic signal timing plans; creating as-builts and maintaining records; applying for energy rebates and funding grants; and being familiar with the central traffic signal control system. Additionally, this position may coordinate, and/or review the work of support staff, technicians, engineering associates, electricians, and contractors.	These positions will allow for better maintenance and operations of the City street lighting and signal systems																												Y			INCLUDE	04	REALIGN											
TR_16	Electrical Maintenance - Convert LT to Permanent													Electrical Maintenance				N	As part of the LED conversion, the City is now responsible for maintenance and operations of an additional 44,000 street lights, or an 80% increase in street lights and assoicated, poles, circuits, and control.  These position are needed to maintenance of the additional 4,000 street light poles, associated circuits, tracking of infrastructure, mapping of the system, and updates to the as-built drawings the City records.	These positions will allow for better maintenance and operations of the City street lighting and signal systems																												Y			INCLUDE	05	REALIGN											
TR_17	Parking Operations - Convert LT to Permanent													Parking Operations				N	"This package converts two positions from limited term to permanent.  These positions support parking meter operations. The Program Manager manages the parking meter shop, which repairs and maintain parking paystations and meters.  The Assistant Program Specialist position supports parking paystation operations.    The positions include;
•	30000465-Program Manager 40025017
•	30000462-Assistant Program Specialist 40025011

"	The City will continue to efficiently manage the on-street parking system, including parking paystations and meters.																												Y			INCLUDE	06	REALIGN											
TR_18	Active Transportation - Convert LT to Permanent													Active Transportation				N	"This package converts three positions from limited term to permanent.  These positions support the Safe Routes to School, Smarttrips, and Sunday Parkways programs.
The positions include;
•	30000465-Program Manager 40025207
•	30001183-Transportation Demand (TDM) Assistant 40023769 
•	30001183-Transportation Demand (TDM) Assistant 40024317 
The program manager position oversees Active Transportation Operations, including bike share, bike racks, Street Seats, Missing Links (low-cost infrastructure projects), business outreach, and the coordination of Transportation Demand Management efforts, including review of TDM plans as part of conditional use permits, and TDM services for Parking Districts.  The TDM assistant positions support the Safe Routes to School program, including coordinating the Smart Trips to School encouragement program targeted at elementary and middle school students, performing data entry and analysis for the Safe Routes parent surveys, managing mailing lists and databases of student, parent and school contacts, performing inventory and distribution of Safe Routes materials and resources, and assisting the team in event planning.  These positions support Sunday Parkways events; managing a robust social media presence, administering  vendor recruitment, retention, communication and payment systems, organizing and involving hundreds of community organizations, and overseeing office volunteers.  These positions also provide evaluation, data entry, and analysis for PBOT’s Annual Bike Counts, Pedestrian Trail Counts, and other programs.   
"	PBOT will continue to provide Active Transportation services, increase active transportation mode share, and meet the larger goals set out in the Portland Plan, Climate Action Plan, Bike Plan 2030 and the soon to be updated Comprehensive and Transportation System Plans.																												Y			INCLUDE	07	REALIGN											
TR_19	TransportationPlanning - Convert LT to Permanent													Transportation Planning				N	"This package converts three positions from limited term to permanent in Transportation Planning.
The positions include;
•	30000448-Business Systems Analyst 40024318: This position is needed to assist planners and project managers by improving the quality and effectiveness in communicating complex topics to the public, elected officials, and the media. 

•	30000375-Associate Planner 40024316: This position is needed to assist planning and project managers in public involvement, ensuring consistency, completeness, and quality. 

•	30000375-Associate Planner 40023775: This position provides vital technical and policy support on area and citywide planning as well as technical analysis for resource development. 
"	PBOT will continue to provide Transportation Planning services, and meet the larger goals set out in the Portland Plan, Climate Action Plan, Bike Plan 2030 and the soon to be updated Comprehensive and Transportation System Plans.																												Y			INCLUDE	08	REALIGN											
TR_20	Parking Operations - Cut Position & Add M&S													Parking Operations				N	"This package cuts one position and moves appropriation from personal services to materials and services, to support meter operations.  The Parking Paystation Technician position is vacant and has never been filled.  The materials and services appropriation is for parking paystation bankcard processing. In 2015, the City moved from an in-house payment gateway to contractor-provided payment processing system, to ensure compliance with Payment Card Industry (PCI) rules.  This decision package covers part of the increased cost of the new processing system.
The position is;
•	30000099-Parking Paystation Technician 40023023

"	The City will continue to efficiently and effectively manage the on-street parking system, including parking paystations and meters.																												Y			INCLUDE	09	REALIGN											
TR_21	Parking Enforcement - Convert PT to FT													Parking Enforcement				N	"This package converts two part-time positions into one full-time position.  These Parking Code Enforcement Officer positions provide enforcement for parking regulations city-wide.  Changing from two part-time positions to one full-time position will allow PBOT to meet scheduling needs.
The positions include;
•	30000185-Parking Code Enforcement Officer position 40002300  convert from part-time to full-time
•	30000185-Parking Code Enforcement Officer position 40023016  cut from budget


"	The City will continue to efficiently and effectively provide parking enforcement services.																												Y			INCLUDE	10	REALIGN											
TR_22	OMF IA Balancing																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
TR_23	Naito Parkway Improvement Project													Capital Improvement Program				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
TR_24	Paving Preservation													Capital Improvement Program				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
TR_25	Street Repair & Traffic Safety Program													Paving Preservation				N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
TR_26	Bridge Engineer Position													Bridges and Overpasses				N	We have received new funding from the GF to replace the Sunderland Bridge and also funds from ODOT to replace the SE 122nd Bridge over Johnson Creek.  These are both 3 year projects and there are also several other projects (NE 7th Bridge over Sullivan’s Gulch, NW Flanders over I-405) that will likely be funded.  We need the position in order to deliver these projects.	We have received new funding from the GF to replace the Sunderland Bridge and also funds from ODOT to replace the SE 122nd Bridge over Johnson Creek.  These are both 3 year projects and there are also several other projects (NE 7th Bridge over Sullivan’s Gulch, NW Flanders over I-405) that will likely be funded.  We need the position in order to deliver these projects.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
TR_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_51	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_52	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_53	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_54	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_55	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_56	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_57	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_58	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_59	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_60	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_61	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_62	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_63	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_64	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_65	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_66	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_67	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_68	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_69	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_70	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_71	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_72	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_73	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_74	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_75	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_76	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_77	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_78	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_79	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_80	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_81	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_82	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_83	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_84	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_85	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_86	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_87	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_88	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_89	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_90	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_91	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_92	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_93	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_94	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_95	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_96	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_97	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_98	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
TR_99	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA	Portland Water Bureau																	C																																														
WA_01	Regulatory Monitoring													REGULATORY COMPLIANCE				N	"Background

The purpose of this package is to add capabilities to the Portland Water Bureau’s (PWB) existing Water Quality Laboratory to perform in-house Cryptosporidium analysis for the purposes of continuing to achieve compliance with the Bureau’s Bull Run Treatment Variance (BRTV).

In 2012, the State of Oregon granted Portland a variance to the Long Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water Treatment (LT2) Rule requirements for the Bull Run source water.  The conditions of the Bull Run Treatment Variance require Portland to maintain an ongoing monitoring program for Cryptosporidium. Water samples require Cryptosporidium analysis by a State-accredited laboratory approved to conduct EPA Method 1622/1623/1623.1. Failure to monitor would result in revocation of the variance; as a result, the PWB would be required to build a treatment plant for Cryptosporidium, which would cost an estimated $80 million.

To date, the PWB has been meeting the BRTV monitoring conditions by shipping water samples across the country to accredited private contract laboratories--of which only a handful exist.  Many inherent issues and risks (mailing delays and lost samples) have made this type of arrangement increasingly challenging to meet PWB’s weekly monitoring requirements. Furthermore, the commercial Crypto lab industry is projected to decline, which could result in lab closures, leaving the PWB with few choices of accredited labs or ability to control costs.  Due to the risks, challenges and anticipated reduction in labs, it is necessary for PWB to secure its own in-house capabilities and expertise in order to ensure ongoing compliance and maintain a high-quality Bull Run Treatment Variance Program. 

Request

This package includes 2.0 FTE (ongoing) within the Water Quality Laboratory to conduct Cryptosporidium analysis using the required EPA methods, as well as an additional, one-time $130,000 during FY 2016-17 for laboratory operating supplies. It is estimated to take up to one year to establish the lab, hire and train employees, and receive state accreditation prior to transferring from the contract lab sample analysis to in-house analysis.  Therefore, FY 2016-17 would be the set-up year for the lab while the bureau continues to use professional services for the sample analysis requirements.  In year two, the outside contracts will no longer be necessary, therefore, the funds formerly used for contracts will be used to fund the 2.0 FTE.  In addition, cost savings will be realized on contract procurement and administration.  By 2017-18, the in-house Crypto lab section will be fully operational.  In the future, the PWB will be looking for efficiencies to further reduce costs, an opportunity from having the autonomy of an in-house lab.

The 2.0 FTEs would include one Laboratory Coordinator and one Laboratory Analytical Specialist, who would serve as the Principal Analyst and Analyst for EPA Method 1622/1623/1623.1, respectively. Two staff are necessary to provide adequate coverage and capacity for the monitoring program, which includes over 500 analytical tests per year. The staff would also conduct technical research and scientific investigation to support the variance, manage contracts, and analyze over 300 algae/zooplankton samples per year (a related area that has been underserved in PWB’s laboratory). 
"	Compliance with State and Federal water quality and environmental regulations is one of the Bureau’s strategic Performance Measures. The Water Bureau was the first water provider in the nation to achieve compliance with the Long Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule through an alternative method, based on the high quality of the Bull Run source water.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
WA_02	Community Information and Outreach													Support				N	"Background

The Portland Water Bureau’s (PWB) Community Information and Outreach Group (Group) is a team of four professionals dedicated to increasing communications between the PWB and the Portland community.

The Group provides timely, accurate, transparent information about the bureau’s projects and activities and it manages public information requests.  It is also responsible for listening to and incorporating the thoughts and ideas of the public into bureau projects. Team members work to inform and assist the public on construction and maintenance projects as well as developing and implementing public involvement opportunities.

The bureau has recently invested in a communications director to oversee the Group and to write and implement a strategic communications plan that will allow the bureau to better connect to all its customers, reinforce its purpose, protect and increase the level of trust associated with our utility, and raise awareness of critical issues such as water efficiency and supply. The plan will also provide a road map for increasing public participation with the bureau, teach us more about community values and priorities, and gain acceptance on critical bureau projects. 

Request

In order to increase outreach to traditionally underserved communities and build capacity for upcoming large Capital Improvement Projects (CIP), the Portland Water Bureau is requesting 2.0 FTE positions.

Equity

The Group does not currently work specifically on reaching out to minority populations, such as non-native speakers, new arrivals, and low-income households. Implementing audience-centered communications with these groups is critical as the city becomes more diverse. This position would identify and build relationships with existing community groups in targeted areas, review Bureau policies that impact the City’s equity goals, and assist customer service efforts to increase participation in the low-income discount program by designing and carrying out a specialized outreach program. 

Large CIP Outreach

Currently, 1.9 FTE positions handle outreach and communication for all large construction projects and assist on public involvement on medium and smaller projects as they are available. One of these positions also serves as webmaster (maintaining the website, creating content, tracking usage) and social media coordinator across all platforms, and provides internal communications (dispatch newsletter). 

The Water Bureau has several large multi-year projects including the Willamette River Crossing and Washington Park reservoirs planned that are beyond the workload of the existing team. 
The new position will also grow the Group’s capacity for digital design. No backup for website or social media currently exists and the current workload prevents the bureau from efficiently or effectively implementing communications to reach all customers.
"	The Citizen’s Utility Board memo regarding Input on Portland Water Bureau FY 2016-17 Budget Development dated January 5, 2016 directly addressed and supported the addition of Community Information and Outreach staff.  It is a goal that the Water Bureau outreach and engagement efforts continue to strive to reach citizens in an equitable manner.  Efforts to support the goal include a survey in 2016 to gather information from customers whose voices have historically been underrepresented including lower-income residents, people without access to the internet, and Portlanders with limited English proficiency.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
WA_03	Infrastructure Maintenance													Customer Service				N	"Background:

This decision package is a response to the growing need to optimize the Portland Water Bureau’s (PWB) approach to maintaining, upgrading, and protecting water system infrastructure. The PWB utilizes a Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM) approach to maintaining assets in order to establish a safe minimum level of maintenance. This approach requires staff to perform regular predictive and preventive maintenance on key assets to reduce unexpected failures. In addition to preventative maintenance, the PWB has a robust CIP program that continues to add new assets that require maintenance. Many departments within the bureau are requesting additional resources in order to meet expectations of maintaining new and aging assets in a cost-effective manner. 

Request: 

The PWB is requesting 3.5 FTE to assist with the growing responsibility to maintain new and aging infrastructure in the water system. 

Hydraulic Network Analysis (0.5 FTE)

The creation of a full-time Engineering Tech II is needed for updating the hydraulic network model to stay in sync with the actual water system as water main work and other projects are completed. The recently completed Water Audit and Wholesale Allocation studies both strongly suggest that the system demands be updated yearly, and due to the volume of shutdown reviews, direct field support work, and other requests, the full implementation has been slower than anticipated.  Further, the number of identified pending model updates has been steadily increasing for almost three years. In order to complete the implementation and yearly updates to the new network model while continuing to perform other daily work, it is necessary to increase staffing levels.  By shifting a Civil Engineer to half time and hiring a full-time Engineering Tech II, the group would be able to maintain the hydraulic network model and move forward with other projects. The model is used for capital facility planning, evaluating water system shutdowns, determining the geographic area affected by possible bacteriological contaminants, estimating impacts of high-risk assets failures, and calculating water system demands to establish wholesale customer rates.

Facilities Maintenance (1.0 FTE)

Over the last three years, the Grounds crew has lost 2.0 FTE Horticulturists and 1.0 FTE Utility Worker positions due to City-wide budget cuts. This request is to reinstate one of the lost Horticulturist positions, to provide a higher level of landscape expertise, including technical pruning, plant identification, and design.  Due to the loss of the Horticulturist positions, there is currently no one with that skill set in the Grounds Crew.  The Grounds Crew, including this position, maintain all PWB grounds around facilities and properties, including but not limited to: Groundwater and Well Fields, Pump Stations, Terminal Reservoirs, Tanks, and Hydroparks. Recently completed facilities, such as those at Kelly Butte, require a higher level of grounds maintenance than the current Grounds crew is able to perform. While most of these projects are located on existing sites that were maintained in the past, the conditional use permits obtained for construction on these sites require a much higher level of horticultural expertise.  In addition, the landscaping under these permits is much more extensive than in the past.  Maintaining these areas significantly increases the amount of work necessary to meet the requirements of the permits, as well as the Bureau’s goal of maintaining our properties at a level that meets community expectations.

Reliability Centered Maintenance (1.0 FTE)

The Electrical Shop provides O&M support for all infrastructure from Headworks to in-town operations, including our groundwater supply and Interstate buildings. They also provide electrical support on CIP projects from the Planning and Design phases to Construction. The bureau has been completing large capital projects which include significant new electrical systems that require maintenance. The primary role of the Electrician is to install, maintain, and troubleshoot electrical equipment used to operate the PWB’s water system. The Electrical Shop is not adequately staffed to complete the scheduled predictive and preventative maintenance tasks, which has increased the backlog of electrical preventive maintenance tasks. The approval for an additional Electrician would help the PWB meet the requirements of an aggressive CIP program while providing an additional resource to satisfy the RCM maintenance needs. This new position would allow the Electrical Shop to put a greater focus on performing necessary predictive and preventive maintenance tasks. The anticipated result would be reducing the preventive maintenance (PM) backlog to reduce the risk of unexpected failures that are proven to be more costly to repair. 



Security (1.0 FTE) 

A Water Security Specialist is needed at the Interstate facility. The position will be a responder for intrusion alarms at nearby sites, and supports Interstate staff and contractors with keys and access. Currently, there is a gap in security at the Interstate Facility during daytime hours. The primary need is for perimeter security, building access control, and oversight of the PWB fleet and equipment. Due to a lack of personnel, the Security group is unable to keep up with the ongoing demand for a workday security presence. Further, employees have requested a security presence, especially during the early evenings, when many employees leave for the day. Funding this security position would help the bureau better meet State requirements in responding to water-related intrusion alarms in the area, improve response time to alarms and video observations, and assist with access control and issuing personnel keys at Interstate.
"	Each position within this request assists the Water Bureau in reaching its strategic goals. Part of the Bureau’s mission is to provide reliable and adequate water supply while maintaining the water system to provide sufficient quantities of high quality water to meet the needs of the community on an equitable, efficient and sustainable basis. In doing so, it is integral that the Bureau maintain the water system in a proactive, strategic and cost-effective manner. All of these functions tie directly to key service level indicators which ensure that the Bureau is meeting its goals to support its mission of reliably providing excellent quality water that meets or exceeds regulations.																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
WA_04	Information Processing													Customer Service				N	"Background

This decision package is a response to the increased workload experienced by our Development Services and Record Keeping staff. The quantity of development-related work for the Development Services staff has been increasing sharply: From FY 11-12 to FY 14-15, residential building permit reviews have increased 62%, commercial building permit reviews have increased 47%, public works permit reviews have increased 92%, and the number of Water work orders generated has increased by 200%. Revenues from System Development Changes (SDCs), new services, and mains have increased 46% or $4.0 million from FY 2012-13 to FY 2014-15.  Also, the projected revenues from permit fees and engineering plan reviews increased by $100,000 in the current fiscal year.  Those revenues are projected to increase an additional $100,000 in FY 2016-17.  Furthermore, the bureau has over two million Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook mail documents and PDF documents currently residing on the file server and is experiencing a growth rate of approximately 20%per year. A majority of these files are not being managed against any specific retention schedule as many retention schedules have not been reviewed or updated for 20 years. 

Request

In order to maintain customer service and records management standards, the Water Bureau is requesting 3.0 FTE positions.

Development Services

The addition of the Engineering Tech III and Engineering Tech II (2.0 FTE) would result in a reallocation and rebalancing of staff work responsibilities to enable staff to meet the City’s mandatory deadlines for development review. 
Development Services (DS) staff review plans, impose requirements, and determine and collect appropriate fees and charges for residential building permits, commercial building permits, land use applications, public works permits, right-of-way (street opening) permits, and street vacations. In addition, DS staff evaluate developer plans to determine the size and scope of needed water system work to be done.  In FY 14-15 the DS staff collected $12.6 M for development-initiated water work (services, main extensions, system development charges). DS staff must also respond in a timely fashion to a wide range of questions and concerns from customers, conferring with customers and other PWB and City bureau staff via emails, phone calls, and face-to-face meetings.  Virtually all DS staff duties must be accomplished under the City’s mandatory development review turnaround times. Moreover, DS staff also staff a customer service desk in the Bureau of Development Services' Development Services Center, Monday through Friday, 8:00am to 5:00pm.

Records Management

A Management Analyst position will work with bureau staff to identify the required records retention period based on administrative, legal, operational and historic criteria, and move the appropriate documents with the appropriate retention schedule into the Enterprise Content Management system. The addition of the Management Analyst in the Records/GIS section will also positively affect the department’s ability to review all bureau specific retention schedules annually and update them through the established Auditor’s Office approval process; ensure the Bureau is meeting established records management standards (City, State, Federal, others); ensure the bureau is meeting the needs of the Legal Records Management Program as required by City Attorney’s Office; process 75 cubic feet of Engineering Project records annually for archiving and disposition; and add 100,000 documents per year to the Enterprise Content Management system. 
"	"Delivering high quality customer service by responding to customer requests in a timely manner is an important part of the Portland Water Bureau’s mission. This decision package will assist the Bureau in meeting City mandatory development review timelines as well as continuing to reach and improve upon its customer service goals. Further, meeting Federal, State and local regulations on records management will also improve our response time for requests, and reducing the staff time in answering them while helping us deliver high quality service in a cost-efficient manner. 

"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
WA_05	Tabor Preservation Project													Support				N	"Background

Resolution No. 37146 was adopted by City Council on July 15, 2015 to maintain, repair and preserve the Mount Tabor Reservoirs following disconnection.  The Portland Water Bureau (PWB), and other City agencies as are necessary, including any City agency that may be responsible for managing the reservoirs in the future, are directed to work with the Mt. Tabor Neighborhood Association (MTNA) to prioritize maintenance, repair and preservation work identified in the 2009 Mt. Tabor Reservoirs Historic Structures Report to be accomplished over a four-year period beginning in FY 2016-2017.

Request

The PWB is submitting this request to the General Fund to allocate $750,000 for FY 2016-17 and $4 million total over the next four years to the maintenance, repair and preservation work identified in the 2009 Mt. Tabor Reservoirs Historic Structures Report.
 
The PWB and other City bureaus as are necessary are directed to collaborate with the MTNA to develop an interpretive program and interpretive center that tells the history of the Mt. Tabor reservoirs and the City’s water system. 
 
The PWB will confer and consult with the MTNA before planned work and after emergency events in the park which have potential impact on trees with the intent to minimize the visual impact on the treed character of the park.
 
The PWB and other City bureaus as appropriate will coordinate and collaborate with the MTNA on a joint Semi-annual written Report to City Council documenting compliance with this Resolution, as well as annual presentations to City Council and the Portland Utility Board, including a Final Summary Report to be submitted by December 31, 2020 to City Council regarding the implementation of the maintenance, repair and preservation work identified in the 2009 Mt. Tabor Reservoirs Historic Structures Report.

"	This request fulfills the City’s commitment to MTNA related to the 2009 Mount Tabor Reservoirs Historic Structure Report.																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS	ONETIME										
WA_06	Hydro Parks																	N	Funding for maintenance of Water's hydro parks																													Y			EXCLUDE	06	ADDS											
WA_07	OMF IA Balancing																	N	"This package includes balancing adjustments for various Office of Management & Finance changes in the FY 2016-17 Budget. These changes include:
$308,833 for the bureau's allocation of move of the data center from the third floor of the Portland Building; funded from contingency.
"																													Y			INCLUDE	NA	REALIGN											
WA_08	Solar Installation at Groundwater Pump Station																	N																														Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
WA_09	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_10	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_11	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_12	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_13	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_14	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_15	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_25	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_26	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_27	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_28	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_29	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_30	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_31	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_32	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_33	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_34	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_35	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_36	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_37	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_38	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_39	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_40	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_41	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_42	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_43	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_44	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_45	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_46	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_47	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_48	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_49	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
WA_50	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD	Portland Development Commission																	C																																														
ZD_01	Powell/Division BRT Local Action Plan													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description: This additional funding will be used to implement Economic and Community Development Initiatives articulated in the Powell/Division Transit and Development Local Action Plan. The goal is to assist businesses and individuals in preparing for a stronger economic climate (rising rents, increasing land values) that will result over the next 5 years from the BRT investment and a stronger market in Portland, and avoiding displacement.                                       
City funds will allow the expansion of programming and staff, primarily in community based organizations such as the Jade and Division Midway Alliance NPIs in areas of:  Community Outreach, Business Development, and Workforce Navigation.  Funding from the City will leverage funds from other sources including Metro and Tri-Met.
This was the NED Leadership Group Budget Subcommittee’s top priority add package assuming that the BRT Locally Preferred Alternative is accepted by City Council."	"Expected Results:
This add package will allow for the implementation of an on-the-ground Community Development Team that will be focused primarily in the Division portion of the BRT corridor within Portland. Three primary functions will be expanded or put in place including:
•	Community Outreach Worker
•	Workforce Navigator
•	Business Technical Assistance Advisor

Grants to NPIs and qualified service providers will fund positions.  Positions will work as a team and in close coordination with the Jade and Division Midway Alliance NPIs.  Some funding may also be used to work with anchor institutions around employment and business opportunities.  
"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	ADDS											
ZD_02	Small Business Increase Project													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description: 
The Small Business Increase Project is a wealth creation initiative that uses the nationally recognized StreetWise ‘MBA’™ curriculum to provide growth-oriented small business owners the opportunity to develop a roadmap for expansion.  PDC began piloting this program in FY 2015-16 and launched its first cohort of 12 businesses in January 2016.  The StreetWise ‘MBA’™ program has been used by 36 communities across the United States.  The Increase Project is focused on assisting graduates of PDC’s Microenterprise and Small Business Development Program and entrepreneurs of color.  The program aims to: 
•	Increase owner know-how through a practical and engaging cohort-based model. Small business owners will be given relevant business concepts, best practices, and training to turn growth plans into action. 
•	Increase access to financing with the help of a $2,500 marketing grant and access to meaningful financing, our small business owners can achieve scale, buffer losses, and exploit business opportunities that previously were out of reach.
•	Increase market access participants will begin to identify which products and customers promise to be the most profitable and which markets have the greatest potential for growth, helping them better understand their competition, the needs and desires of their customers, and how to effectively reach customers and improve sales. 
•	Increase mentoring opportunities by connecting participants to a growing and diverse pool of successful entrepreneurs throughout the U.S. who can provide timely advice, lived experiences, and a listening ear will ensure that confidence and know-how is combined to improve outcomes. 
City funds will be used to provide cohort based learning to up to 40 growth-oriented entrepreneurs using the StreetWise ‘MBA’™ curriculum and model.
"	"Expected Results: 
Metric	Target
Number of businesses enrolled in program	30
Number of businesses who complete a 3 year growth plan	80%
Number of businesses who maintain or increase revenues (reported 1 year after graduation)	80%
Number of businesses connected to a mentor after graduation 	80%
Number of businesses who access financing (reported 1 year after graduation)	50%
Number of businesses who hire additional employees (reported 1 year after graduation)	50%
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	ADDS											
ZD_03	Portland Benefit Corporation (B Corp) Program													Traded Sector Economic Development				N	"Description: 
B-Corps are for-profit companies certified to meet rigorous standards of social and environmental performance, accountability, and transparency. The unifying goal among B-Corps is to redefine success in business and help create a global economy that uses business as a force for good. Some of Portland’s best known and most well respected companies are B Corps, including New Seasons Market, Neil Kelly Company, Bridgetown Natural Foods, DePaul Packaging, Hopworks Urban Brewery, and Gerding Edlen Development Inc.
Our local community faces increasing social and environmental challenges, and it is apparent that solutions are not just the domain of the public and not-for-profit sectors. Private sector businesses must be part of the solution both in community action and internal operation. As the City of Portland’s economic development agency, the Portland Development Commission (PDC) seeks $350,000 from the City General Fund to launch a local B Corp Program. 
Funds would be used to:
•	Procure and develop a company assessment tool in partnership with B-Lab, a national nonprofit organization focused on promoting B Corps and helping communities launch B Corp programs;
•	Establish a “Best for Portland” campaign to encourage local companies to seek B Corp certification and a rewards program for top performers;
•	Coordinate company training and technical assistance;
•	Procure (direct hire or consultant) a program manager.      
"	"Expected Results: 
Metric	Target	Time Frame
# of new companies participating in B Corp assessment program	50 	FY 16-17
% of participant companies that increased their B Corp score following first assessment and technical assistance	50% 	FY 16-17
"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	ADDS											
ZD_04	OT/CT Action Plan District Management													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description: The Old Town Chinatown neighborhood is a highly diverse historic district, featuring affordable building stock and social service agencies serving the low-income and homeless population, an active nightlife scene, tourist destinations, higher educational institutions, and a mix of commercial offices and local/independent retailers and restaurants.  Despite these successes, the district struggles to promote a positive identity necessary to achieve a healthy and complete neighborhood.  Addressing real and perceived issues of public safety and livability; balancing residential incomes through the introduction of new middle-income units and preservation of existing affordable housing units; investing in rehabilitation of historic buildings; embracing and enhancing the area’s unique culture, history and identity; and, promoting economic vitality were articulated as top priorities for community stakeholders. 
                                                                                                                                                                         The Old Town Chinatown 5-Year Action Plan (“Action Plan”), endorsed by City Council August 2014, is a comprehensive community development initiative to create a safe, vibrant, economically healthy neighborhood in Old Town Chinatown.  The Action Plan outlines recommended actions and a dedication of PDC, City and private sector resources to achieve three strategic objectives over the five year term:
•	Attract new neighborhood investment to activate key properties and improve district connectivity;
•	Promote business vitality by increasing employment and retail activity; and
•	Align resources and build local capacity for improving district livability.

The Action Plan specifically calls for the dedication of City resources over a three year period ($30,000/year) to support district management, promotion and programming.  The investment leverages a minimum required match of $30,000/year to be raised by the Old Town/Chinatown Community Association.  The objective of this work is to coordinate key communications, programming efforts and branded improvements within the neighborhood to increase positive media coverage, bring people living and working in the neighborhood together, and drive interest in the area as a place to do business, spend time and money.                                                                                                                  
The first year of the program is currently underway and combined City and community-raised funds are being used to procure services necessary to develop and implement a strategic outreach and communications plan (“Strategic Plan”), including a unified vision for the neighborhood, and definition of deliverables and metrics for implementation.  The remaining two years of the program will focus on implementation of the Strategic Plan and making refinements as necessary based on performance metrics and funding levels.                                                                                                
"	"Expected Results: Defined deliverables and metrics are currently under development with the preparation of the Strategic Plan, and are subject to change.  Generally, the work for the coming year is anticipated to include the following focus areas:                                                                                                                                                  
Focus Area and Deliverables / Metrics:
Event & Community Development: Programming	Neighborhood events, markets, festival street activation; Opportunities for small business promotions; Coordination of branded investments including Big Bellies, streetlight banners, etc.          
Communications & Public Relations: Neighborhood website; Social Media strategy; Protocol/templates for neighborhood communications; Press releases & positive media placement; Coordination of various neighborhood campaigns/subcommittee activities                                                                                                                                  
Partner Engagement: Engagement of area businesses and institutions to further implementation of Strategic Plan, including fundraising efforts and development of partnerships with PNCA, UO, etc.                                                                
Development Resources: Vacant business mapping; education re: PDC & City resources; distribution of district data applicable to business development decisions (demographics, ped counts, etc) 

 
"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	ADDS											
ZD_05	Healthcare Cluster													Traded Sector Economic Development				N	"Description: 
The Portland Development Commission’s (PDC) target industry cluster strategy remains the logical organizing principle to support traded sector growth in the City of Portland through targeted retention and expansion efforts, global trade, and business technical assistance. Industry clusters also provide a framework from which economic development and workforce development providers can collectively target programs to improve access to quality jobs. A cluster-based business development strategy is critical in a market like Portland, where limited resources require targeted investments in industries most likely to result in long-term economic growth and shared prosperity through an increase in jobs. 
Historically, PDC’s four target industries were: Athletic & Outdoor Gear & Apparel, Green Cities Products & Services, Technology & Media, and Metals & Machinery Manufacturing. With the adoption of PDC’s new 5-year Strategic Plan in 2015, the agency added a fifth target cluster - Healthcare – to serve as the nexus for an anchor institution strategy designed to connect residents and employers to job and supply-chain opportunities at local hospitals and medical institutions. This new cluster will also serve as PDC’s focal point for strategic work with OHSU related to the Knight Cancer Institute and emerging sectors such as Medical Devices and Health Sciences.     
Funds would be used to procure (direct hire or consultant) a full time business development coordinator focused on business development (business recruitment, retention and expansion), as well as implementation of signature industry and workforce programs and initiatives.      
"	"Expected Results: 
Metric	Target	Time Frame
# of healthcare cluster business retention/expansion visits	    50+	FY 16-17
# of healthcare cluster business relocations (within Portland)    2	FY 16-17
# of healthcare cluster direct assistance, referral activities	     75	FY 16-17
# of successfully launched entrepreneurship programs launched to support emerging healthcare cluster businesses 	                                                                                                1	FY 16-17
# of successfully launched supply-chain programs focused on connecting priority businesses to healthcare procurement opportunities	                                                 1	FY 16-17
"																												Y			INCLUDE	05	ADDS											
ZD_06	Small and Microenterprise Business Development													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description:  The Microenterprise & Small Business Development Program is an initiative of the Portland Development Commission and the City of Portland that aims to create, grow and strengthen micro and small businesses through technical assistance and training. Ten qualified non-profit organizations will deliver technical assistance and training to approximately 500 businesses each year.  City funds pay for 1:1 tailored business advising and on-site, drop-in business advising provided in most NPI and Main St areas.
Technical assistance and training covers basic business skills including but not limited to: 
•	business review and assessment
•	business and marketing plan preparation
•	development of business income statements
•	cash flow analysis
•	bookkeeping and business management	                                                                                        •	loan packaging
•	marketing & merchandising basics
•	business tax preparation
•	sustainable business practices
•	market research

Businesses may also receive business legal services, credit coaching and access to market research.

Services are targeted at business owners of color and those with low-incomes.  Service is prioritized to NPI and Main Street areas.  

Technical assistance providers include:
•	Hacienda CDC
•	Hispanic Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce (HMCC)
•	Immigrant & Refugee Community Organization (IRCO)
•	Lewis and Clark – Small Business Legal Clinic
•	Metropolitan Family Service – Credit Coaching
•	Micro Enterprise Services of Oregon (MESO)	                                                                                        •	Native American Youth & Family Center (NAYA)
•	Neighborhood House – Childcare Improvement Project (CCIP)
•	Portland Community College – Small Business Development Center (SBDC) 
•	PSU – Business Outreach Program
"	"
Expected Results: 
The cumulative impact of cuts to the Micro and Small Business Development Program, including General Fund, Community Development Block Grants and E-Zone, is approximately $105,000.  This will result in the reduction of one contract for long-term, tailored one-on-one advising and elimination of services to approximately 40 businesses. The following are results from FY 2014-2015 for the Micro and Small Business Development Program are shown on the following table.   
Measures	Target with Reduction	Target without Reduction
Long term, tailored, one-on-one advising		
Number of businesses served	350	310
Number of technical assistance hours provided	17,800	15,800
Percent of businesses of color served	70%	70%
Percent of business owners with limited English proficiency	30%	30%
Percent of businesses with a Median Family Income at or below 80% at enrollment	90%	90%
Drop-in advising at NPI and Main Street offices		
Number of businesses served 	360	360
Number of technical assistance hours provided	1,500	1,500

"																												Y			INCLUDE	05	REDUCTION											
ZD_07	Small Business Working Capital													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description: 
The Small Business Working Capital Program is utilized to increase access to capital for small businesses.  Emphasis in the program is on businesses that have historically faced barriers accessing financing from traditional lenders.  Consistent with the 2015-2020 PDC Strategic Plan, the aim of the program is promote wealth creation by broadening access to financing for small-scale, low-income, immigrant, and/or minority-owned firms (target businesses) who aim to grow their businesses.  

PDC will issue a Request for Proposals (RFP) to lending entities to utilize General Fund allocations to administer financial products to fill the needs of our target businesses.  Criteria for selecting the providers include:
•	Leverage of funding from other sources (i.e. Small Business Administration, US Department of Treasury,               commercial loans, crowdfunding, etc.)
•	Demonstrated market need/gap
•	Innovation and partnerships
•	History of successfully serving target businesses
•	History of successfully expanding and/or launching new financing products
•	Maximum financing of up to $50,000 per business
Based on the Requested Budget, the amount that PDC will offer through the RFP is estimated to be $50,000.  With this amount we would anticipate the entities selected through the RFP will be able to offer financing to approximately 10 businesses.  
If this $111,923 reduction is restored, we anticipate entities will be able to offer financing to approximately 20 additional businesses. 
"	"Expected Results: 
Metric	Target with Reduction	Target without Reduction
Number of transactions	10*	30*
Leverage per transaction	Minimum of 1:2	Minimum of 1:2
Default rate	5%	5%
*Assumes an average loan size of $15,000.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	04	REDUCTION											
ZD_08	SE Works Youth Transition Program													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description:  The Youth Transition Project is a youth workforce development program that is focused on serving at-risk low-income 16-21 year olds. The Program seeks to break the cycle of poverty through attainment of a General Education Diploma (GED) and successful transition to college.                                                                                    
The GED is only one component of the transition to college; participants need a positive peer support group, care and attention and full wrap around services to be successful. SE Works provides strong relational supports through case management, one-on-one counseling and support, and appropriate referrals to treatment centers and other resources.  Case management continues as the students graduate from the program and transition to college.  Additionally, each youth has a volunteer mentor to support healthy social development.                                                                                
City funds assist with case management and allow for extended hours at the Dahl Family Youth Education and Career Development Center in SE Portland.  The City’s investment leverages $310,000.00 in funding from other sources including PPS, Juan Young Trust and SAFECO to support the Youth Transition Project to support three Masters Level Teachers with teaching licenses and a Center Director.                                                                                                
"	"Expected Results: 
During FY 2014-2015, the SE Works Dahl Family Youth Education and Career Development Center served a total of 133 students. Of those participants, 68 enrolled in SE Works’ GED program which provides intensive support to prepare students for this exam. The other 65 were enrolled in pre-GED tutoring that SE Works offers to prepare youth for the GED cohort, were referred to the PPS Reconnect Center or engaged onsite with SE Works for independent study for credit retrieval for HS Diploma. See chart below for FY 14/15 GED outcomes which are included in the City’s contract.
Specifically, the City General Fund support funds one full-time social worker who works with all enrolled students. The main goal of this FTE is to support students’ success by providing some stabilization in their lives during their GED journey and transition to college. Services include connecting students to substance abuse services, pregnant and teen parenting supports, mental health and legal aid supports and providing college and career readiness training, facilitating college tours, assisting with financial aid applications, and providing ongoing support once students begin the transition to College. 
                                                                                                                                                                          FY 14/15 City Contract 
Metric	Target	Outcomes
Enrollment in GED	60 participants	68
GED Test Completed	51 (85% of participants)	51 (75%)
GED Earned	43 (85% of test takers)	24 (47%)*
*The national average of GED Earned for 2014 was 35%. See next page.                                                                                    
At the beginning of 2014 the GED changed substantially. It became a computer-based exam closely tied to the Common Core State Standards. The Exam is much more rigorous than the previous GED, which was last updated in 2002. The new exam consists of four sections, Reasoning through Language Arts, Mathematical Reasoning, Social Studies and Science. Students must pass all four sections of the exam with a minimum score of 150 in order to earn the GED diploma. Globally, the completion and graduation rates plummeted after the new exam was rolled out in 2014. The chart below illustrates the change since 2012. Long-term average graduation rates for individuals who attempted all sections of the GED hovered around 70%. 2014 data is still preliminary, but graduation totals of 55,000 and 86,000 have been widely published. This compares to over 400,000 graduates in 2012 and 560,000 in 2014. Preliminary data shows a 35% graduation rate in 2014 (although GED Testing Service estimates a 60% passing rate).
 
Consistent with global data, the new, more rigorous GED has proven to be a real challenge to SE Work’s students as well. It is fair to keep in mind that the global data cited is for all adult test takers, regardless of their age, housing situation, social, academic, and economic status. Participants in this program have significant barriers to overcome and often have started at a lower academic level (grades 5-6) than the average adult. The students who did not pass one or any of the GED tests are invited back to continue working one-on one-with tutors in the RE-ADMIT program. Four of the students who did not complete the GED have gone on to college in Remedial Education classes. 

"																												Y			INCLUDE	03	REDUCTION											
ZD_09	Voz													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"Description: Voz is a worker-led organization that empowers diverse day laborers and immigrants to improve their working conditions and protect civil rights through leadership development, organizing, education and economic opportunity.  Voz operates the Martin Luther King, Jr. Worker Center, which connects hundreds of workers each month with local employers.  Voz also provides training to workers to improve their ability to secure permanent employment.  Of the over 872 day laborers served by Voz in FY 2014-2015, around 50% were homeless or housing insecure.                        
The City’s investment partially funds 2 FTE at Voz.  One of these positions is the Worker Center Director, who oversees the operations of the Center.  This includes marketing the center to potential employers, overseeing the activities of our Wage Theft Legal Team, supervising trainings and classes at the center, and strengthening the infrastructure of the center.  Additionally, the City funds two part-time positions of the Worker Center Coordinators who handle day-to-day operations at the center, including worker registration and dispatching.  These positions are essential to the successful operation of the Center, and the City’s support is the only funding source specifically allocated to pay these staff members.                                                                                                                                                                        
The City funding helped Voz to leverage $110,000 national and local grants to strengthen their workforce development programs.  FY 14/15 grants secured include:
•	LIFT Fund grant for $50,000 work with union apprenticeship coordinators to organize a Careers Fair (held on Saturday, June 27th at the East Bank Esplanade) and to map out career path for each specific union trade. 
•	Oregon Community Foundation (OCF) for $20,000 and Meyer Memorial Trust $40,000 to support Voz’s English classes, job-skill trainings, and for the coordination of the New Americans’ Career Fair.                                                

"	"Expected Results: 
The following are results from FY 2014-2015.  If General Funds support is cut from Voz, it would significantly impact the financial stability of the Martin Luther King Jr. Worker Center.  While Voz has received numerous other grants to support external organizing activities, PDC’s support is the only source of funding specifically allocated for running the Center.  These funds cover 38% of the Worker Center Director’s salary, about 40% of the Worker Center Assistant salaries, and most of the cost of utilities.  The loss of that support would very likely result in cuts of staff and services provided.  This would mean at least 40% less time that the center could be open to employers, which would translate to around 1,500 less jobs for day laborers over the course of a year.  It would also push day laborers back to informal hiring sites on the corners and away from our wage theft assistance programs, computer literacy courses, job skills trainings, and ESL classes.  This loss of jobs and services would be acutely harmful to the day laborers who currently use the Center, especially considering the fact that at least 50% of them are currently experiencing homelessness or housing insecurity.  Homeless workers would lose a site to search for work and access services, and those who are currently housing insecure would lose income and possibly end up on the street.                                                                                
Loss of PDC funding would hamper Voz’s overall fundraising efforts.  It would weaken their case for matching funds from Multnomah County, which they are currently pursuing.  It would also make them less likely to be funded by private foundations, which often look for support from local government and community as a sign of organizational credibility. 
                                                                                                                                                                         Goals:	Outcome:
Support for 400 day labors.	872 workers served, 3,275 day labor hires facilitated
Train 26 individuals in computer literacy.	16 classes with a total of 128 individuals trained in computer literacy.
4 ESL classes	4 English as a second language classes held and attended by 20 individuals
Train at least 96 day laborers	200 day laborers trained in Siding, Flooring/Tile, Basic Plumbing, Basic Electricity, Doors and Windows installation,  Silkscreen, and Pruning
Conduct 6 trainings.	Completed six (6) Health and Safety Trainings (OSHA Certified) provided for 102 individuals
Offer monthly “Know your Rights” trainings.	Completed twelve (18) “Know your Rights” trainings covering labor rights and wage theft prevention tools.
Average hourly wage of $12.87	Day Labors guaranteed at least $12.00/hour.
Ongoing assistance to day laborers	34 Wage Theft cases worked through our Legal Wage Claim Services with claims totaling $34,454, and $13,743 recuperated. As of June 20, 2015 six (6) of those cases were still on-going.
"																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REDUCTION											
ZD_10	Greater Portland													Traded Sector Economic Development				N	"Description: 
Greater Portland Inc (GPI) is a regional public-private economic development organization focused on 1) coordinating regional business recruitments among greater Portland’s (Portland-Vancouver MSA) various local economic development organizations, and 2) leading regional marketing and branding to promote the region as one of the nation’s most competitive and vibrant metropolitan economies. In addition, GPI serves as a key partner to PDC in implementing the region’s broader economic development strategy (Greater Portland 2020) and its international trade and investment strategy (Greater Portland Global).                                                                                                                                    
For the past four years, the City of Portland has invested $100,000 annually in GPI to lead regional economic development. The City’s General Fund investment has focused primarily on, marketing and branding the region to business stakeholders, coordinating local business retention/expansion projects where multiple greater Portland jurisdictions are under consideration, and managing regional business relocation projects, including responding to recruitment related Request for Information (RFI) and Request for Proposals (RFP). Coordination from GPI in these areas remains critical to ensure regional cooperation and a unified economic development voice. In addition, the City’s $100,000 annual investment in GPI directly supports staff focused on coordinating implementation of the region’s international trade and investment strategy, a key priority for PDC and the target industries it serves.                                        



"	"FY 2014-15 Results: 
Key quantitative outcomes resulting from GPI’s utilization of the City of Portland’s FY 2014-15 $100,000 investment.               
Metric	Target	Result
# of coordinated retention/expansion projects where region’s outside of Portland are consideration	1-3	1
# of business recruitment prospects and leads developed	50	58
# of regionally coordinated recruitment RFP and RFI responses	25	34
# of foreign direct investment events with foreign investment teams planned and coordinated	4	4
# of outbound recruitment and sales trips planned and executed	4	5
# of inbound site selector visits coordinated	3	3
# of earned media ad placements highlighting Portland companies or industries	At least 1	6"																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REDUCTION											
ZD_11	Adult/Youth Workforce realignment													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	Reallocates $20,239 of current service level appropriation from Small and Microenterprise Business Development Program to Workforce Development Program based on current year forecast of program management/staffing activity between the programs.	No programmatic impacts are anticipated.																												Y			INCLUDE	01	REALIGN											
ZD_12	Cluster/Entrepreneurship Support Realignment													Traded Sector Economic Development				N	Reallocates $24,877 of current service level appropriation Cluster Development (business recruitment) to Entrepreneurship within the Traded Sector program, as most business recuruitment work has been transferred to Greater Portland Inc. and PDC will be more focused on entrepreneurship ecosystem capacity building. The effort will seek to extend PDC's work on inclusive entrepreneurship and integrate it more broadly within our partner services. PDC will also seek to develop a shared action plan and community metrics.	No programmatic impacts are anticipated.																												Y			INCLUDE	02	REALIGN											
ZD_13	FY 2015-16 Carryover: B-Corp and IF													FY 2015-16 Carryover: B-Corp Program and Innovation Fund				N	This package processes program carryovers from the 2015-16 Spring BMP.	The Mayor’s Proposed Budget includes two program carryovers that were processed in the Spring FY 2015-16 Supplemental Budget. Innovation Fund funding of $90,000 will be carried forward to continue work on the “Bridging the Digital Divide for Disadvantaged Businesses” program. General Fund discretionary funding of $75,000 appropriated in the Spring FY 2015-16 Supplemental will be carried forward for work on the Portland Benefit Corporation Program.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
ZD_14	Living Cully													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	The budget includes $211,000 in one-time GF discretionary to support neighborhood economic development projects in the Cully neighborhood.	This package will provide funding for the redevelopment of the Sugar Shack property in the Cully neighborhood.																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
ZD_15	Venture Portland: Business Association Pilot													Neighborhood Economic Development				N	"This package requests $166,036 in one-time GF discretionary funding for Venture Portland's pilot program to bolster business assocations outside of the Central City. In 2015, Venture Portland launched the East Portland Pilot Project, a 12 month effort supporting six established East Portland neighborhood business districts. With additional funding, Venture Portland will continue its work in East Portland and expand its operations to North Portland. This funding is for a one-year catalytic project designed to respond to the disparity among Portland's business associations. The initiative will be focused on the following four strategies: 
Staffing - 90 total hours staffing/week (or 10 hours/week per district). Venture Portland will employ up to four community organizers working in 9 districts across East and North Portland.
Personalized Technical Assistance - Staff will assist with the creation of annual workplanns and budgets for business associations, as well as district event management and marketing campaigns.
Grant Funds - $4,000 grant available to each district ($36,000 total across 9 districts)
Quarterly Quadrant Conversations - Hosted gatherings for busines district associations in E/N Portland to bring business leaders together to build partnerships or develop cross-district programming."	"This initiative will last one year. Venture Portland seeks to achieve the following short term outcomes:
Membership: 10-20% increase in each targeted business association
Leadership: 10-20% increase in volunteers; establish/achieve diversity benchmarks
Revenue: 10-20% increase in each targeted business association

This initiative seeks to achieve the following long-term goals:
Expanded support network for East and North Portland small businesses
Stronger ties between East and North Portland businesses and neighborhoods
Distinct branding identities for each targeted business district"																												Y			INCLUDE	NA	ADDS											
ZD_16	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_17	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_18	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_19	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_20	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_21	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_22	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_23	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
ZD_24	Decision Package																	N																														N			INCLUDE													
